            i         1
 EISENHOWER, THE CIA, ANCT
   THE HIDDEN STORY OF
AMERICA'S   SPACE   ESPIONAGE

PHI LIP TAU BM AN
                                                    U.S. $27.00
                                                    Can.    $42.00



During the early and most _ .gerous years of the
cold war, a handful of Americans, led by President
Dwight D. Eisenhower, revolutionized spying and
warfare. In great secrecy and beyond the prying eyes
of Congress and the press, they built exotic new
machines that opened up the Soviet Union to
surveillance and protected the United States from
surprise nuclear attack. Secret Empire is the dramatic
story of these men and their inventions, told in full
for the first time.


    In a brief period of explosive, top-secret innovation
during the 1950s, a small group of scientists, engineers,



                                                                     5
businessmen, and government officials rewrote the book
on airplane design and led the nation into outer space.
In an effort no less audacious than the creation of the

atomic bomb, they designed, built, and operated the U-2
and supersonic SR-71 spy planes and Corona, the first
reconnaissance satellites — machines that could collect

more information about the Soviet Union's weapons in a
day than an army of spies could assemble in a decade.
   Their remarkable inventions and daring missions
made possible arms control agreements with Moscow
that helped keep the peace during the cold war, as well
as the space-based reconnaissance, mapping, commu-
          nications, and targeting systems used by America's
armed forces in the Gulf War and most recently in
Afghanistan. These hugely expensive machines also led
to the neglect of more traditional means of intelligence
gathering through human spies.
     Veteran New York Times reporter and editor Philip
Taubman interviewed dozens of participants and mined
thousands of previously classified documents to tell this
hidden, far-reaching story. He reconstructs the crucial
meetings, conversations, and decisions that inspired
and guided the development of the spy plane and
satellite projects during one of th r          t perilous periods
in our history, a time when, .                   ower said, the

world seemed to be "racing towai                  \ phe."
                    (continued on back flap;
i
PHILIP TAUBMAN




SIMON        & SCHUSTER
NEW   YORK   • LONDON   • TORONTO   • SYDNEY   • SINGAPORE
SECRET
EMPIRE
Eisenhower, the CIA, and the Hidden
Story of America's Space Espionage
                                       1
                         SIMON & SCHUSTER
                            Rockefeller Center
                       1230 Avenue of the Americas
                           New York, NY 10020

                   Copyright © 2003 by Philip Taubman
         All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction
                      in whole or in part in any form.
      Simon & Schuster and colophon are registered trademarks
                     of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

       For information about special discounts for bulk purchases,
             please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales:
          1-800-456-6798 or business@simonandschuster.com.
             Manufactured in the United States of America
                   1   3   5   7   9   10   8   6   4   2

         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data.
                           Taubman, Philip.
Secret Empire : Eisenhower, the CIA, and the hidden story of America's
                  space espionage / Philip Taubman.

                                    p. cm.
                Includes bibliographical references and index.
       1. Aerial reconnaissance, American — History — 20th century.
2. Space surveillance — United States — History — 20th century. 3. United
       States. Central Intelligence Agency — History — 20th century.
          4. U-2 (Reconnaissance aircraft). 5. Cold War. I. Title.
       UG763.T38 2003
      327.1273'009'045— dc21                                2002042937

                           ISBN 0-684-85699-9
FOR   FELICITY,   MICHAEL,   AND   GREGORY
        Digitized by the Internet Archive
                     in 2012




http://archive.org/details/secretempireeiseOOtaub
"It was as if an enormous floodlight had been turned on
in a darkened warehouse. "
                            — Albert D. "Bud" Wheelon,
        deputy   director   for science and technology,
             Central   Intelligence   Agency, 1962-1966
                CONTENTS




Preface, xi
Cast of Characters, xvii


REIMAGINING            RECONNAISSANCE
                    1946-1954

Chapter One
   "Racing Toward Catastrophe," 3
Chapter Two
  The Origins of Strategic Intelligence, 3 5
Chapter Three
   Stargazing in Santa Monica, 57
Chapter Four
   Seeing Air, 72
Chapter Five
  "I Think I Have the Plane You Are After," 84


A NEW     SPY       PLANE    TAKES   FLIGHT
                    1954-1956

Chapter Six
  The Role of a Lifetime, 113
Chapter Seven
   "This Thing Is Made Out of Toilet Paper," 128
Chapter Fight
   Photographing the President's Cattle, 149
Chapter Nine
   Big Game Hunting, 169
                        ix
             x       Contents

      VAULTING         INTO    SPACE
                   1956-1976

Chapter Ten
  Earthbound, 193
Chapter Eleven
  Creating Corona, 212
Chapter Twelve
   "Go Off and Build That Thing," 241
Chapter Thirteen
  Heartbreak, 270
Chapter Fourteen
   "Capsule Recovered Undamaged," 298
Chapter Fifteen
  A Stradivarius, Not a Cracker Box, 325
Epilogue
  Losing the Inventive Spark, 356

Notes, 371
Bibliography, 403
Acknowledgments, 42 1
Index, 427
                                PREFACE




The gathering at George Washington University on May 23,
   1995, could have been mistaken for a college reunion. Several
hundred participants, mostly men of retirement age, swapped stories
about the past and compared notes about their careers. The tales they
recounted, however, had nothing to do with school. The visitors had
come to mark the official public disclosure of one of the great secret spy
enterprises of the twentieth century — the creation by the United States
of reconnaissance satellites in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The engi-
        neers, scientists, businessmen, and former government officials who as-
             sembled inWashington that fine spring day had designed, built, and
launched the first satellites. Yet due to the airtight secrecy that cloaked
the project, many of the men who had worked on different components
at sites around the country had never met prior to the declassification
conference. Some had never seen the remarkable pictures of Soviet mil-
      itary bases, shipyards, and munitions factories that the satellites snapped
from more than 100 miles out in space. Suddenly freed from the oaths of
secrecy that had sealed their stories for decades, they talked late into the
night, poignantly aware that their service to the nation would finally be
recognized.
   This book is the chronicle of these pioneers and their work, including
the groundbreaking science and backbreaking failures that marked the
swift passage of America's aerial espionage from the lower atmosphere
to the stratosphere to outer space during the presidency of D wight D.
Eisenhower. Faced with the danger of a surprise Soviet nuclear attack in
the 1950s — the gravest military threat the United States had ever con-
        fronted— the Eisenhower administration forged a creative partnership
with science and industry to produce new spy planes and satellites that
could see behind the Iron Curtain to measure the strength of Soviet
military forces and detect preparations for a surprise attack.

                                       XI
                              xii       Preface


  In reconstructing this hidden chapter in American history, I encoun-
      tered a singular group of people and sequence of events that trans-
             formed the nature of espionage, and in so doing, profoundly changed
the national security apparatus of the United States in ways that con-
      tinue to affect the nation today. The earliest satellites served as the
building blocks for the powerful space-based systems the United States
employs today to gather intelligence, direct combat operations, and
guide warplanes and precision missiles and bombs to their targets in for-
     eign wars.
  The story told in these pages unfolded in a simpler but no less per-
     ilous era than the one the United States faces today. It was a time when
the nation was frightened by the emergence of a new and powerful for-
      eign enemy. At first, we knew little about the exact dimensions of the
Soviet threat, and feared the worst. Unable to see how many warplanes
and missiles the Kremlin was building, we assumed the numbers were
great and growing larger every day. The only way to answer such an un-
            fathomable threat, it seemed, was to devote the national treasure to
building ever greater and more expensive defenses, even at the risk of
damaging the American economy and creating what D wight Eisen-
      hower described as a garrison state. That debilitating path was largely
skirted, due in no small measure to the ingenuity and industry of the ar-
         chitects ofthe new espionage technologies.
   Looking back at the Eisenhower era, it is clear that a rare combina-
      tion of circumstances encouraged innovation in defense and intelli-
         gence technologies. Whether that environment can be replicated today
to help deal with new threats is unclear.
   The Eisenhower presidency (1953-1961) has often been depicted as a
time of muddled leadership, but I found in the area of military and intel-
        ligence technology that Dwight Eisenhower was a visionary leader with
a high tolerance for risk. In these fields, Eisenhower was confident in his
judgments, open to new ideas, respectful of the contributions science
could make, and wary of the Pentagon's conventional thinking and
stifling bureaucracy. Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower repeat-
      edly bet on daring new defense technologies, often rejecting the recom-
                    mendations ofcabinet members and the established institutions of
                             Preface             xiii


Washington, including the military services. When things went wrong,
which they often did during the development and testing phase of new
projects, he didn't flinch. The result was a formidable array of new spy
systems and weapons, including exotic spy planes and satellites, nuclear-
powered submarines and aircraft carriers, intercontinental ballistic mis-
      siles and nuclear warheads compact enough to fit atop missiles. All in all,
it was a time of landmark advances in defense, a record unequaled by
nine subsequent presidents.
  Eisenhower, unlike most of his successors, gave high-powered scien-
    tists frequent access to the Oval Office and invited them to provide in-
               dependent advice and a fresh perspective on research and development
projects. He paid close attention to what they told him. When the Pen-
       tagon or other government agencies failed to produce inventive ideas,
or neglected the ones they had, men like James R. Killian, the president
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Edwin Land, the cre-
      ator of instant photography, urged Eisenhower to look at unconven-
           tional proposals like the plans for the ungainly U-2 spy plane or a
no-frills spy satellite that returned its exposed film to earth. The pro-
              ductive collaboration between government and science, which carried
over into the Kennedy administration, was sundered by the Vietnam
War. It has never been fully rebuilt.
  Once Eisenhower settled on a spy project, even one that involved air-
      planes or rockets, he turned it over to the CIA to manage, figuring the
Pentagon was too cumbersome to handle it and too porous to keep it se-
      cret. Only a retired five-star general could get away with that, or know
instinctively that it was the smart thing to do. As the World War II
supreme commander in Europe and a national hero, Eisenhower had
the clout and nerve to give the CIA the leading role in the creation of re-
               connaissance planes and spy satellites. The projects would not have
been possible without the help of the Air Force, including the loan of
top officers to help run the programs, but Eisenhower understood that
the armed services were too bureaucratic and cautious to develop
heretical new technologies on their own.
   At the CIA, Eisenhower found an unexpectedly agile partner for his
spy pursuits. Though Allen Dulles, the director of central intelligence at
                              xiv       Preface


the time, was not technology minded, the agency sprang into action
once the White House made clear the CIA was going into the aircraft
and satellite business. Under the direction of Richard M. Bissell Jr., who
is better known for his stewardship of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of
Cuba in 1961, the agency proved to be an effective manager of advanced
technology projects. By today's more exacting standards, Bissell's oper-
      ation would probably be closed down after a few days for lack of admin-
             istrative controls and a failure to micromanage contractors such as
Lockheed and General Electric that had signed on to build the new ma-
         chines. There were few rules, little paperwork, and accounting proce-
      dures that would doubtless give congressional committees a fit today,
but it all somehow worked smoothly, and in the case of the U-2 , ahead
of schedule and under budget. The big defense contractors themselves
seemed more supple and inventive than they are today.
   Unfortunately, the gusher of espionage innovation during the Eisen-
         hower years, and another burst of creativity in the 1960s and 1970s,
were not followed by a similar period of technological advancement in
the 1990s that might have helped the Central Intelligence Agency and
Federal Bureau of Investigation home in on Mohammad Atta and his
fellow hijackers as they prepared for their assault on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon on September 1 1, 2001 .
   Ironically, one of the reasons Washington was unprepared for Osama
bin Laden was that over the years it had come to rely heavily on spy
satellites and other sophisticated hardware. The machines, which were
made for tracking Soviet missiles and tanks, were not as adept at moni-
       toring terrorist plots. The high cost of building and operating satellites
also consumed such a large chunk of the intelligence budget that more
conventional espionage activities tended to be shortchanged. This in-
          cluded the maintenance of a worldwide corps of experienced field offi-
     cers who might have a chance to penetrate terrorist groups. And the
giant intelligence organizations which grew up around spy satellites
were hobbled by senseless bureaucratic rivalries and independent re-
         porting channels that impeded efforts to pull together signs of terrorist
activity when they were detected by different agencies.
   My interest in the development and impact of spy satellites was
                                Preface            xv


stirred shortly after I began covering the CIA and its fellow spy agencies
for the New York Times in 1979. One day I got a call from an official in
the Carter administration. He told me the president of South Korea,
Park Chung-hee, had been assassinated during a bloody coup d'etat that
day. When I checked the news wires there was nothing about the inci-
       dent. Nor had the foreign desk of the Times heard anything from a cor-
                  respondent who happened to be in Seoul, the South Korean capital. As
a newcomer to the intelligence beat, and the Times, I began to worry
that I had raised a false alarm. Soon the paper was preparing to order up
three or four stories about a news event that had yet to be confirmed or
reported anywhere. Several hours later, news of the assassination finally
flashed across the wire services.
  I later learned that the original information about the killing had
come from the interception of South Korean military communications
channels by sophisticated American listening devices and that top
Carter administration officials had been notified as soon as word
reached Washington. As months passed and I developed sources at the
CIA and other agencies, I found that the great preponderance of critical
intelligence data flowing into Washington came from satellites and
other technological devices. The massing of Soviet forces on the Afghan
border in 1979 — the indication that an invasion was imminent — had
been tracked by spy satellite. When Soviet troops assembled for a possi-
    ble invasion of Poland in December 1980, satellite photographs helped
to alert Washington. When I learned of sensitive information about
American collection systems, the CIA and the White House were quick
to ask the Times to delay publication, a request we sometimes honored
to prevent the exposure of operations that seemed vital to American
national security. Even the fact that the United States possessed spy
satellites was considered a state secret and the existence and name of
the organization that managed them — the National Reconnaissance
Office — were classified, and remained so until 1992.
  As I learned about the satellites and their companion systems, and re-
      alized how they had eclipsed traditional forms of espionage, I wanted to
know more about their origins. So began the search that led to this
book.
                          xvi       Preface


   As the United States struggles today to overcome the new threats to
its security, and to devise new methods of watching its enemies, it may
find useful guideposts in the Eisenhower years. The ambition of Dwight
Eisenhower's espionage endeavors was exceedingly high — to overcome
a terrifying blindness that left the nation vulnerable to surprise attack
and to defeat an acute fear of the unknown threatening to disfigure
American society. He succeeded.
                      CAST   OF    CHARACTERS




Henry H. "Hap" Arnold: commander of the Army Air Corps (later re-
           named the Army Air Forces), 1938-1946. He recognized the role sci-
      ence could play in developing military technologies and built a network
of scientists and businessmen who studied photography and flight.

Harold R. "Hal" Austin: reconnaissance pilot with the Strategic Air
Command. His May 8, 1954, overflight of the Soviet Union in a con-
         ventional plane helped convince Washington to develop better recon-
         naissance equipment after he was nearly shot down.

James G. Baker: Harvard optics expert and lens designer. He designed
cameras that provided high-resolution photos from the U-2 spy plane,
13 miles above the earth, and the Corona reconnaissance satellites, 100
miles out in space.

Richard M. Bissell Jr.: joined the CIA in 1954. Served as deputy direc-
    tor of central intelligence, 1959-1962. He assembled and ran the highly
efficient management teams that directed the development of the U-2
spy plane, the supersonic A- 12 spy plane, and the Corona spy satellites.

Merton B. Davies: researcher at the California-based RAND Corpora-
      tion. He championed the creation of spy satellites and did some of the
early design work on them.

Allen W. Dulles: director of Central Intelligence, 1953-1961. He re-
          luctantly added complex technological development projects to the
work of the CIA.

John Foster Dulles: secretary of state, 1953-1959. He supported the
use of new espionage systems to gather information about Soviet mili-
     tary forces.

                                    xvn
                     xviii    Cast of Characters


Dwight D. Eisenhower: president of the United States, 1953-1961. His
faith in science and openness to new ideas led to the development of
revolutionary new espionage and military technologies.

Trevor Gardner: special assistant for research and development to the
secretary of the Air Force, 1953-1955. Assistant secretary of the Air
Force, 1955-1956. He helped prod the Eisenhower administration into
action to prevent a surprise Soviet nuclear attack.

Gen. George W. Goddard: chief photographic officer in charge of aer-
    ial photographic research, Wright Field, 1936-1944. He was a pioneer
in aerial reconnaissance.

Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster: Eisenhower's staff secretary. He served as
the president's gatekeeper and confidant on military and intelligence
matters.

Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson: gifted and prolific airplane designer for
the Lockheed Corporation, 1933-1975. He designed the U-2 and A- 12
spy planes, shattering aeronautical conventions in the process.

Lyndon B. Johnson: Democratic senator from Texas, 1949-1961; vice
president of the United States, 1961-1963; president of the United
States, 1963-1969. As a senator, he led hearings in the late 1950s on So-
     viet bomber and missile threats.

John F. Kennedy: president of the United States, 1961-1963. The first
president to benefit extensively from intelligence information provided
by spy satellites.

Nikita S. Khrushchev: first secretary of the Soviet Communist Party,
1953-1964. His efforts to strengthen Soviet military power led to fears
in Washington that the Soviet Union could launch a surprise nuclear at-
     tack on the United States.

James R. Killian Jr.: president of MIT, 1948-1959. As a science adviser
to Eisenhower, he pushed for the development of new spy technologies.

Martin Knutson:      one of the first U-2 pilots.
                        Cast of Characters               xix


Edwin H. Land: inventor of instant photography and founder of Po-
       laroid Corporation. As an adviser to Eisenhower and the CIA, he pro-
         moted the choice of the U-2 over competing spy plane proposals
favored by the Air Force and encouraged the creation of other new espi-
       onage systems.

Richard S. Leghorn: Army Air Forces pilot and Kodak research scien-
    tist. He recognized the need to gather intelligence about America's ene-
       mies in peacetime to help prevent a surprise attack and pressed for the
development of a new, high-flying spy plane in the years immediately
following World War II.

Gen. Curtis E. LeMay:             head of the Strategic Air Command,
1948-1957. Air Force chief of staff, 1961-1965. He resisted the devel-
         opment ofthe U-2.

Tony LeVier:        Lockheed's top test pilot. He was the first pilot to fly a
U-2.

Arthur C. Lundahl: the CIA's top photo analyst, 1953-1973. He built
and directed the nation's primary photo interpretation center in the
1950s to handle pictures produced by the U-2 and the first spy satellites.

James W. Plummer: program manager for the Corona satellite project
at Lockheed Missile Systems Division; director of the National Recon-
           naissance Office, 1973-1976. He guided the novel satellite program
through crippling problems with booster rockets, guidance systems,
film, and cameras.

Francis Gary Powers: pilot of the final U-2 overflight of the Soviet
Union on May 1, 1960. He survived the downing of his plane, was cap-
      tured and put on trial by the Soviet government, and spent two years in
prison there before being released in a prisoner exchange.

Donald A. Quarles: assistant secretary of defense for research and de-
             velopment, 1953-1955; secretary of the Air Force, 1955-1957; deputy
secretary of defense, 1957-1959. He supported the development of new
military technologies.
                   xx       Cast of Characters


Gen. Osmond J. "Ozzie" Ritland: vice commander, Western Develop-
       ment Division, 1956-1959. He worked as Richard BisselPs deputy dur-
    ing development of the U-2 and the Corona satellite system and worked
alongside Gen. Bernard Schriever, who ran the Air Force's missile de-
           velopment programs.

Gen. Bernard A. Schriever: commander, Western Development Divi-
       sion, 1954 — 1958; commander, Air Research and Development Com-
          mand, 1959-1966. As director of missile development programs, he led
the Air Force into space in the 1950s and pushed for the development of
both the U-2 and the Corona satellite system.

Harold E. Talbott: secretary of the Air Force, 1953-1955. He favored
alternatives to Lockheed's proposal for a high-altitude reconnaissance
plane but eventually endorsed development of the U-2.

Harry S Truman: president of the United States, 1945-1953. He ap-
       proved the first cold war overflights of Soviet territory in 1948.

Gen. Nathan F. Twining: Air Force chief of staff, 1953-1957; chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1957-1960. He thought aerial reconnais-
       sance operations should remain under the purview of the Air Force.

Albert D. "Bud" Wheelon: deputy director of the CIA for science and
technology, 1962-1966. He consolidated the scientific and technologi-
    cal programs of the CIA in a directorate of science and technology and
began the work that led to the creation of a new generation of advanced
spy satellites in the 1970s, including the first near-real-time photo-
reconnaissance satellites, which transmitted photographs back to earth
electronically.
          PART   ONE




Reimagining Reconnaissance
         1946-1954
                              CHAPTER             ONE




     "Racing Toward Catastrophe"

Hal         Austin had always assumed that the first time he flew an
       American warplane into Russian airspace, Moscow and Lenin-
     grad would be burning, incinerated by an American nuclear attack. This
was no Strangelovian fantasy. It was his job description.
   As a reconnaissance pilot in the Strategic Air Command (SAC), he
had standing orders in the early 1950s to join the initial wave of Ameri-
    can bombers over Moscow if the cold war turned hot. He would activate
high-powered cameras to record the damage below. Every week, no
matter where he was based, Austin would carefully review his role under
the Emergency War Order, the top-secret plan for SAC operations in
the opening hours of World War III. Though his day-to-day work was
training other pilots in flight techniques, Austin knew his ultimate re-
                  sponsibility, however unthinkable it might seem, was to guide his air-
      craft through the nuclear firestorm to determine what was left of the
targets around the Soviet capital that the bombers were supposed to de-
stroy.
   His assumptions were overturned on May 8, 1954. As first light
faintly illuminated the rolling English countryside west of London that
Saturday morning, Austin and his two-member crew were summoned
to an unscheduled meeting at Fairford Royal Air Force Base, where they
were temporarily stationed. The three men, dressed in their flight suits
and anticipating another uneventful day of flying, were separated from
the other American crews by their wing commander, Col. Joe Preston,
and directed to a small, simply furnished conference room. There, two
SAC colonels whom they had never seen before — one an operations of-
                         4       Secret      Empire


ficer, the other an intelligence officer — invited them to be seated, then
gave them startling news.
   That day, the airmen were told, they were to fly over the Soviet
Union to photograph military airfields on Russia's northern frontier.
They would be hundreds of miles from friendly airspace, under orders
to maintain radio silence. If they were shot down, the U.S. government
would disavow their mission and make no effort to rescue them.
   Any doubt that they were about to venture along the most hazardous
front lines of the cold war was eliminated when one of the colonels un-
         furled long,
                a     narrow map and placed it on the table. It showed a corri-
     dor starting over the Barents Sea and running southeast from the Soviet
port of Murmansk across the Kola Peninsula and White Sea to
Arkhangelsk. The remote Arctic area was studded with Soviet air and
naval bases and air defense forces.
   The three men, part of the 91st Strategic Reconnaissance Wing,
stood up to get a closer look at the map. Nine airfields were marked
along the flight plan. The two colonels did not explain why these bases
had been selected for photographing, but Austin surmised that the war
planners at SAC wanted fresh targeting information. As Vance Heav-
ilin, the navigator for the flight, examined the thin strip of paper, he
learned there was a reason for its diminutive dimensions. If the plane
was forced down in Soviet territory, his duty was to crumple the map
into a small ball and swallow it before the Americans were captured.
   In the chilling, cold war calculus that prevailed at the time, the mis-
      sion was a necessary intelligence-gathering task. The United States had
to update its war plans frequently, and monitoring the picket line of air-
         fields along the northwest Soviet border would show whether the Rus-
        sians were gathering their forces for a surprise attack. Knowing what
aircraft were in the area would also help SAC figure out how to suppress
Soviet air defense units so American bombers could reach their assigned
targets over the Russian heartland. Austin's high-flying RB-47E, a six-
engine jet that could cruise above 40,000 feet at better than 600 mph,
would be well above the range of the Soviet MiG-15 fighters that were
thought to be based in the region. The crew was told that the most ad-
       vanced Soviet fighter, the MiG-1 7, was still being tested and none of the
            "Racing     Toward      Catastrophe"              5

new planes would likely be stationed along their route. The new fighter
was designed to fly higher and faster than the MiG-15, and might be
able to intercept the American plane.
   In truth the flight plan was a high-risk gamble, a cold war roll of the
dice that might well end up killing Austin and his crew or depositing
them in a Siberian prison camp. Once the American plane crossed into
Soviet airspace, there was no guarantee it would ever get out. There was
even a chance that the flight could ignite a wider conflict with the Soviet
Union.
  Under international law and the rules of war, the planned violation of
Soviet airspace would be an act of aggression, potentially reason enough
for the Kremlin to retaliate by attacking the United States. President
Dwight Eisenhower well understood the danger, and kept a tight rein
on flights over Soviet territory, insisting that most missions be cleared in
advance by him. Later in his presidency, he would tell the Pentagon's
top civilian and military leaders that nothing would send him more
quickly to Congress to request authority to declare war than the viola-
     tion of American airspace by Soviet aircraft.
   Harold R. Austin, a native of Sweetwater, Oklahoma, was twenty-
nine years old, a quintessential SAC warrior immersed in the unforgiv-
     ing business of preparing to wage nuclear war. Flying was his life and
passion, and he was skilled at it. His commanders had placed him among
the elite group of pilots selected to make sure other airmen met the SAC
standards for handling of the RB-47E jets that had recently been ac-
       quired for reconnaissance work.
   As Austin surveyed his aircraft on the morning of May 8, 1954, it
seemed well suited to his daring mission. The streamlined plane with
swept-back wings was equipped with six General Electric J47 engines,
each capable of producing 7,200 pounds of thrust. With a maximum
speed of 610 mph, a range of 3,500 miles, and a cruising ceiling above
40,000 feet, it was ideal for high-altitude, long-distance reconnaissance
flights.
   The reconnaissance model was built to carry cameras, not bombs.
The bomb bay, which would normally hold one nuclear bomb, was in-
      stead configured to house cameras for photographing ground installa-
                         6        Secret      Empire


tions. Other cameras on board would make a record of the plane's
radarscope during the flight. The combination would allow SAC not
only to study the Soviet bases and combat aircraft in the Arctic region,
but would also provide a sequence of radar images that could later help
to guide pilots to the same targets at night or in bad weather.
   Like most 1950s bombers, Austin's RB-47E was only lightly armed.
Two M-24 20mm cannons were located in the tail. They could only be
operated by remote control by the co-pilot if he swiveled around to face
the rear. Bomber crews knew the guns were unreliable and would offer
only a feeble defense against far more agile and heavily armed fighters.
   Austin entered the hatch at the belly of the plane and climbed a short
ladder to the cockpit, where he took his accustomed place in the front
seat. Carl Holt, the co-pilot, was from Pittsburgh. He settled in behind
Austin, divided by the co-pilot's instrument panel. A bubble canopy
would cover them in flight. Heavilin, an Ohio native, descended a step
to the navigator's quarters, a windowless space in the nose that was
crammed with navigational instruments, a radar screen, and other
equipment. There was just enough room in a cramped aisle alongside
the pilots for the crew members to move about during the flight.
   Austin powered up the engines, and with a deafening rumble, the
plane rolled down the taxiway to await takeoff clearance from the con-
     trol tower. The English countryside was a lush green from the spring
rains. As the plane climbed into the sky shortly after 7 a.m., the tidy lit-
    tle village of Lechlade was visible below. The plane crossed over the me-
               andering Thames River, which stretched east toward Oxford and on to
London.
   As agreed in advance with the other two crews that were flying with
Austin that day, he took the lead as the three aircraft headed out over the
North Sea. The flight plan called for the planes to refuel off the Norwe-
     gian coast, then proceed around the northern tip of Norway to a point
100 miles north of Murmansk, where the other two crews believed all
three planes would turn back.
   The tankers, also from the 91st Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, were
waiting when Austin reached the preset rendezvous point off Stavanger,
a port city on the southwest coast of Norway. In a delicate piece of aer-
            "Racing       Toward       Catastrophe"                 7

ial choreography that he had practiced dozens of times, Austin guided
his plane under and slightly behind the tanker and slowed his speed.
The long refueling boom was lowered from the plane toward Austin
and into the RB-47E's receptacle. Once the connections were secure,
thousands of gallons of jet fuel streamed into fuselage tanks.
   From Stavanger, Austin proceeded northeast along the Norwegian
coast for more than an hour, passing by Bergen and Trondheim. He
soon crossed the Arctic circle. The northernmost region of Europe was
now visible, a desolate, windblown landscape at the top of the world. At
the far tip, Norway, Finland, and the Soviet Union coexisted uneasily by
the Barents Sea. Murmansk was less than 150 miles down the coast from
the Norwegian-Soviet border.
   The moment to part company with the two other SAC aircraft had
come. Heavilin checked the map and the aircraft heading, plotting a
course toward Murmansk. He relayed the information to Austin, who
then banked the plane to the right on a southeast flight path. As the
plane slowly wheeled toward the Russian mainland, Austin could see the
pilot and co-pilot of one of the other planes twist around and look at
him in disbelief. Jimmy Valentine, the other pilot, was a good friend,
and Austin waited tensely to see if he would break the radio blackout.
He didn't, though he was mystified and alarmed by Austin's unexpected
maneuver.
  Within minutes, the Soviet coastline loomed in the distance, and,
with it, the invisible dividing line between international and Soviet air-
       space. Austin was right on course. But after flying through the morning
without generating contrails, the plane entered a new air mass, and its
progress across the cloudless sky was clearly marked by a white ribbon
stretching back to the horizon. The Russians didn't need a radar system
to see that an unidentified intruder was coming their way.
   They were waiting, on high alert. Unbeknownst to Austin, ten days
earlier three British crews, using American RB-45C airplanes tem-
               porarily based at Sculthorpe Royal Air Force Base on England's east
coast, had made a nighttime flight over the western Soviet Union. So-
     viet air defense forces around Kiev had unsuccessfully tried to shoot
down one of the planes with antiaircraft fire. The two other aircraft
                           8        Secret       Empire


were pursued by Soviet fighters, but escaped untouched. Commanders
in Moscow were furious at the ineffectual performance, and the entire
air defense system had been placed on heightened alert.
   Heavilin switched on the cameras and Austin leveled the plane as it
coasted in over Murmansk, a gritty seaport that served as the Soviet
Union's main fishing and naval hub in the Arctic region. Directly below
were the shipyards and concrete-block buildings that the Russians had
erected in the inhospitable terrain to take advantage of the ice-free wa-
      ters, warmed by the remnants of the Gulf Stream. One of Russia's most
sensitive military installations, the submarine base at Severomorsk, was
located not far up a narrow inlet that leads to the open sea.
   As instructed, Austin had climbed to 40,000 as he neared the Soviet
coast, even though the plane was carrying the fresh load of fuel it had
picked up off Stavanger. The combination of weight and altitude re-
       duced the plane's speed to about 5 10 mph. Austin had questioned the as-
         signed altitude at the morning briefing, concerned that he would lose
airspeed just as he penetrated Soviet airspace. There was no sign of
Russian resistance as the RB-47 passed over its first targets, two airfields
outside Murmansk. But as the crew completed the photographing of the
second base, Holt spotted three fighters rising toward the American air-
      craft. The planes approached but made no effort to attack. They had ap-
              parently been scrambled into the air to get a better look at the intruder.
   Austin, Holt, and Heavilin were determined to complete their mis-
       sion, believing that their altitude and airspeed provided protection
against any attack. The first group of Soviet planes dropped back toward
their base. A second and then a third set appeared, but remained out of
attack range below the Americans. Austin continued over the White Sea
to Arkhangelsk, where the crew photographed several other airfields.
At that point, six new fighters roared into view, climbing rapidly toward
the reconnaissance plane. As they got closer, Austin concluded that they
were MiG- 17s.
   Austin ordered Holt to unbuckle himself from his seat so he could
swivel around to see what the Russian planes were doing and get the
guns ready for firing. Holt was just turning when Austin saw tracer
rounds streaking above and below. Any illusions about invulnerability
            "Racing      Toward      Catastrophe"                9


vanished instantly. "We had been identified as foe, and they were going
to shoot us down if they could," he said.
   He told Holt to return fire with the cannons, warning that the next
attack run would come right up their tailpipes. The co-pilot got off two
or three shots before the guns jammed. But the brief burst forced the
pursuing jets to pull away from the prime firing position behind the
American plane. Firing from 30 to 40 degrees to the side, the Russian
pilots would not have as good a shot at disabling or destroying the plane.
  Austin hollered, "The hell with this 40,000-foot bit. I'm gonna let
down." Since the altitude wasn't proving any defense against the high-
performance Russian planes, he wanted to descend to 37,000 feet,
where he would pick up speed. "I pushed the nose over," he recalled. In
an effort to outrun the Russians, he rammed forward the six throttles
that controlled the plane's engines.
   The plane accelerated to 550 mph as it descended, and Austin mo-
           mentarily thought he might have eluded the pursuing jets. He turned
toward the next airfield. As he was making the 45 -degree turn to the left,
the plane shuddered as a shell smashed into the top of the port wing,
about 8 feet from the fuselage. It exploded on impact, knocking a jagged
hole in the top of the wing and piercing the fuselage in a dozen spots in
the area of tHe forward main wheel well and the number one main fuel
tank. The largest hole was big enough for a football to fit through.
Austin and Holt, seated forward of the wing, couldn't see the damage,
but they knew the plane had been hit when the intercom system sud-
       denly went dead. The Russian planes, possibly short on fuel and strug-
       gling to keep pace with the RB-47 as it picked up speed, broke off
pursuit. Heavilin quickly calculated that the final airfield on their list
was located along their escape route toward Finland, so Austin headed
southwest toward that target. They got the photographs they wanted,
then raced for the border.
   Flying time to Finland would be about twenty minutes, the last part
of it over Karelia, a land of lakes, pine forests, and wooden churches that
had been contested for centuries by Finland and Russia. The Russians
had time for another attack before the Americans crossed into Finnish
airspace. It came just as the plane neared the border. Three fighters
                       10        Secret     Empire


swooped into view. The leader came up alongside, on the right wing,
close enough that Austin could clearly make out the head of the pilot.
For several minutes — to Austin it seemed like an eternity — the planes
flew in formation, side by side, the American and Russian pilots period-
        ically gazing at one another. The Soviet pilot chased him well into
Finnish airspace before dropping down and out of sight.
   After hooking up with a tanker off England just as his plane was about
to run out of fuel, Austin made it back to Fairford. As he brought his
battered plane to a stop and killed the engines, he saw all the men in the
detachment had assembled to welcome them back. He was more than
ninety minutes behind schedule. One of the ground crewmen, spotting
the large hole in the wing, said, "My God, you must have hit a big bird."
   The next day, the Swedish Defense Ministry complained about the
unauthorized appearance of several planes in its airspace the preceding
day. The ministry reported that the aircraft had crossed into Sweden at
high altitude, flying west out of Finland. The planes had not been iden-
       tified. On May 15, a Helsinki newspaper reported there had been an air
battle over northern Finland on May 8, possibly involving Russian and
American planes.
   The U.S. Air Force firmly denied that there had been any such inci-
       dent. Itinsisted that no American planes had been in the area. Jimmy
Valentine, the pilot who had watched in astonishment as Austin guided
his plane toward the Soviet coastline, knew better, but could only guess
what had actually happened to Austin and his crew. He was still shaken
by the incident when he and Austin met for a drink at a Fairford pub not
long after the flight. "What the hell happened to you guys?" he asked
Austin. Then, as the men sipped their drinks, he said, "Don't ever do
that to me again."
   Valentine didn't know it, but he might as well have been speaking for
D wight Eisenhower as well. It was getting too dangerous to send con-
           ventional airplanes over the Soviet Union to gather information on
Russian military forces. There had to be a safer way.
   Back in Washington, Trevor Gardner didn't need the example of Hal
Austin's flight to know that the United States had to move quickly to in-
      vent new techniques for collecting intelligence about the Soviet mili-
             "Racing Toward               Catastrophe"                    11

tary. In 1954, Gardner was a thirty-nine-year-old special assistant to
Secretary of the Air Force Harold E. Talbott. No one in Washington
was more abrupt and abrasive than Gardner, and no one worried more
about the possibility that the United States might fall dangerously be-
     hind the Soviet Union in devising new military technologies like inter-
                 continental ballistic missiles and ever smaller yet more powerful nuclear
weapons. Gardner was a tireless, sometimes punishing proponent of the
need to accelerate American efforts to produce its own advanced
weapons and spy systems. By the time of Austin's narrow escape, Gard-
    ner was doing his best to kick the Eisenhower administration into in-
           creased action.
  Born in the seaside city of Cardiff, Wales, on August 24, 1915, Gard-
    ner emigrated to the United States when he was twelve and grew up in
Southern California. He studied engineering at the University of
Southern California, where he was an Olympic-class water polo player.
He picked up a business degree at USC, and after working briefly for
several industrial companies, signed on in 1942 as a research adminis-
       trator at the California Institute of Technology. At the elite Pasadena
school he became involved in rocket designing, and in World War II
worked on the Manhattan Project, the secret American program to pro-
     duce an atomic bomb. After the war he was hired by General Tire and
Rubber Company as a senior executive. He quit three years later, in
1948, to found Hycon Manufacturing Company, an electronics and op-
     tical firm located in South Pasadena not far from the Rose Bowl.

   Gardner's energy and profanity were legendary, and by the time he
joined the Eisenhower administration in 1953, he had a well-earned
reputation as a cold, headstrong engineer, business executive, and evan-
       gelical champion of new technologies. Not intimidated by the Air Force
high command or the Pentagon bureaucracy, Gardner started pushing
almost immediately to upgrade missile-development programs, which
were poorly organized, insufficiently funded, and generally neglected
by generals who were fixated on airplanes and saw no need for the Air
Force to get into space. The young, pugnacious Gardner, who dressed
in impeccably tailored suits and always sported a neatly folded handker-
      chief inhis breast pocket, thought nothing of lecturing three-star gen-
                       12       Secret    Empire


erals about their benighted views and using his influence in Secretary
Talbott's office to overcome their resistance. It wasn't long before the
sight of Gardner in Pentagon corridors elicited whispers about that
"bastard" and "son-of-a-bitch."
  Gardner was troubled by Washington's inability to reliably track So-
    viet progress in designing and building new weapons, including missiles
and jet-powered, long-range bombers. Like a growing number of other
officials, he believed Moscow might be developing the means to launch
a surprise nuclear attack against the United States. For those in the
Eisenhower administration who studied the evidence that suggested
such an assault might soon be possible, and knew American defenses
were hopelessly inadequate, the threat became a consuming fear.
   Gardner's concerns had crystallized a few months after he moved to
Washington, when he received a highly secret report from RAND, the
Air Force research center, on the vulnerability of SAC bases in the
United States. The Air Force had commissioned the study to determine
how damaging a Soviet nuclear air attack would be to America's primary
offensive strike force. Based on the best estimates of growing Soviet
power, RAND experts looked at the likely consequences of a Soviet
sneak attack in 1956. They examined high- and low-altitude attack
paths, reviewed American radar operations, and calculated the warning
time the Pentagon might get once Soviet aircraft were detected and
what kind of defensive actions might be initiated against the Soviet
bombers.
   The report, published on April 15, 1953, stunned Gardner and other
officials in Washington. The lightly defended SAC bases, with their
concentration of airplanes, hangars, fuel depots, and crew housing, were
ideal targets for atomic attack. If Russian bombers swept through
America's porous air defenses before dawn on a summer Sunday morn-
     ing, a time of maximum exposure, they could conceivably deliver a
knockout blow. "The enemy will have the capability of destroying a
major part of the SAC potential in a surprise attack at relatively low cost
in bombs and aircraft," the report said. With just fifty atomic bombs,
RAND estimated, the Soviet Union could wipe out two thirds or more
of SACs bombers and reconnaissance aircraft.
            "Racing       Toward        Catastrophe"                 13


   The import was clear and breathtaking: For the first time in its his-
      tory, the United States was vulnerable to a crippling attack from over-
      seas, and would find it difficult, if not impossible, to retaliate after being
struck. Even in the bleakest days of World War II, with Europe slipping
under Nazi control and Japan ascendant in the Pacific, the continental
United States seemed safe from foreign invasion or a disabling military
strike. The advent of nuclear weapons and long-range bombers had
erased that reassuring margin of safety. A surprise attack of unimagin-
      ably destructive force was possible. If it came, it would make Pearl Har-
     bor seem like a pinprick.
   Gardner was so alarmed, he flew out to SAC headquarters in Omaha
to talk with Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, the top commander. From there he
traveled to Pasadena for an unconventional homecoming at Caltech.
Gardner wanted to see Lee DuBridge, the school's president and head
of a White House Scientific Advisory Committee. The panel, com-
       posed of scientists and engineers, had been formed during the Truman
administration to advise the government on technology issues. But it
had done little to push the Truman or Eisenhower administrations into
new technological ventures. Though DuBridge was an eminent figure
in American science, Gardner did not mute his message. Vincent Ford,
an aide to Gardner, later recalled his boss's words to DuBridge: "You're
abnegating your responsibility to science and the country, sitting on
your dead asses in fancy offices in Washington, wasting your time and
the taxpayers' money going through a lot of goddamn motions on a lot
of low-level, shitty exercises — all in the name of science." Gardner
urged DuBridge to study the threat of surprise attack and the nation's
ability to meet it. He wanted an honest report, "the true story, not that
shit Washington is feeding the American people."
   Gardner's language may have been intemperate, but his analysis was
correct. The Soviet Union appeared to be gaining on the United States,
and Washington was misleading the American people with confident as-
              surances about the nation's military and scientific superiority. Ameri-
     cans were only dimly aware that traditional concepts of war and defense
were rapidly being overtaken by new technologies. Bombers powered
by jet engines were compressing time and distance between the Soviet
                         14       Secret      Empire


Union and the United States. Scientists in both countries, taking advan-
     tage of the explosive power of the hydrogen bomb, were starting to de-
     sign smaller nuclear weapons that would be easier to transport between
continents. American and Soviet refinements of rocket technology
promised before long to produce missiles that could deliver nuclear
warheads to distant targets in a matter of minutes.
   By 1954, the combination of cold war hostility, advances in military
technology, and huge gaps in intelligence had reached a critical state.
The Soviet Union possessed atomic weapons and the United States had
no safe, reliable way to spy on its enemy or to gauge its military strength.
This was a breeding ground for fear and instability. The uncertainty
could lead Washington into unnecessary and excessive defense spend-
     ing, draining resources needed for domestic programs and creating a
garrison state, a possibility that weighed heavily on Eisenhower after he
moved into the White House in January 1953. Even worse, it could
make the tripwire for war so taut that a small miscalculation or misun-
            derstanding would trigger a nuclear exchange. Sensing the rising dan-
     ger, Eisenhower wrote in his diary at the end of 1953, "As of now the
world is racing toward catastrophe."
   The makings of a cataclysm dated back to World War II and the inau-
           guration ofthe nuclear age on July 16, 1945, when J. Robert Oppen-
heimer and his fellow scientists in the Manhattan Project detonated the
first atomic bomb in the New Mexico desert. In an instant, the nature of
warfare was transformed. The bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki a
few weeks later demonstrated the annihilating power of atomic
weapons. John Hersey's harrowing account of the Hiroshima attack and
its aftermath, printed by the New Yorker on August 31, 1946, and pub-
        lished as a book later that year, made clear to readers around the world
that mankind had set loose elemental forces that, if wantonly used,
could not just win wars but erase entire civilizations.
   Americans might be proud of the technological achievement of creat-
    ing the bomb or ashamed of the devastation they inflicted in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, they might be thankful for the American lives saved by
the quick surrender of Japan or appalled at the loss of Japanese lives, but
there was no escaping the implications of the atomic era. Once the So-
            "Racing      Toward       Catastrophe"                15


viet Union ended America's nuclear monopoly and built bombers capa-
    ble of carrying atomic weapons over great distances, the oceans that had
effectively protected the United States from foreign enemies would no
longer shield it from a disabling attack. All it would take was a small ar-
      senal of Soviet atomic weapons and a few dozen bombers capable of
reaching Washington, New York, Boston, Chicago, and a handful of
other population centers.
   The collapse of the wartime alliance with the Soviet Union was swift
and jarring to a nation weary of conflict and eager to see a realization of
the Wilsonian ideals embodied in the establishment of the United Na-
      tions. Though it seems clear today that maintaining America's wartime
partnership with the Soviet Union in the postwar era was implausible,
given the two countries' opposing ideologies and economic systems, the
idea did not seem so outlandish in the optimistic days immediately after
the end of World War II.
  Eisenhower himself was infected by the euphoria that followed the
German surrender in April 1945 and the capitulation of Japan four
months later. In his role as supreme commander of Allied forces in Eu-
      rope, he flew to Moscow in August as the guest of Marshal Georgi
Zhukov, the top Soviet general, to celebrate the victory. Eisenhower was
received warmly, met with Joseph Stalin, and stood atop Lenin's Tomb
in Red Square alongside Stalin as thousands of Russians paraded across
the cobblestone plaza, passing below the towering walls of the Kremlin
and the ornate onion domes of St. Basil's Cathedral. Spirits were high,
the personal chemistry between Eisenhower and Zhukov was good, and
the future looked promising. As he prepared to depart, Eisenhower de-
        clared, "Isee nothing in the future that would prevent Russia and the
United States from being the closest of friends."
   Looking back in 1953 at those days of promise, Eisenhower would
say in sorrow, "This common purpose lasted an instant and perished."
   Debate over the origins of the cold war persists today, often colored
by political convictions. It is tempting to look for miscalculation and ill-
will both in Washington and Moscow, and certainly both countries con-
          tributed to the demise of the friendship that Eisenhower described. But
efforts to apportion blame equally misrepresent history. The Soviet
                        16        Secret      Empire


Union, driven by an expansionist ideology, long-standing grievances
against the West, and the decisions of a demented dictator, was inca-
       pable ofsustaining the wartime partnership with the United States and
Britain.
   The power vacuum in Europe after the defeat of Nazi Germany was
an invitation to trouble. Stalin was not content to rely on benign forces
like trade, geographic proximity, and cultural affinity to extend Russia's
influence in Eastern Europe. As John Lewis Gaddis notes in his wise
1997 reassessment of cold war history, We Now Know, Stalin's approach
was based on "equating security with territory."
   This was inimical to the notions of collective security imbedded in
the U.N. charter, signed on June 26, 1945, and the postwar expectations
of American leaders. Washington was determined to defend its political
and economic interests by supporting democracy and free markets in
Europe and preventing renewed military aggression on the continent.
That attitude was bound to collide with Soviet aspirations to extend
Moscow's influence, but an intense rivalry rather than a volatile cold war
might have evolved if Stalin had not moved so ruthlessly to impose So-
    viet control in Eastern Europe.
  The most charitable explanation is that history, geography, and ideol-
    ogy compelled him to defend the Soviet Union's interests by installing
the Communist regimes. Invasions from the west — led by Napoleon
and Hitler — had reached the outskirts of Moscow, and Russia had suf-
       fered horrific losses in two world wars during Stalin's lifetime. Leninism
taught that imperialism was a natural and inevitable dynamic of capital-
     ism. But these justifications, however much Stalin may have subscribed
to them, cannot excuse what was essentially a brazen move to establish a
Soviet empire in Eastern Europe.
   By early 1946, less than a year after the defeat of Germany, idealism
was in retreat. On February 9, Stalin delivered his first broad policy
statement since the end of the war. It was a grim analysis that talked of
the incompatibility of Communism and capitalism and the inevitability
of war between the two systems. Even allowing for some rhetorical ex-
     cess in addressing Communist Party leaders in Moscow, the speech was
           "Racing       Toward       Catastrophe"                  17

alarming. On February 22, George Kennan, the American ambassador
in Moscow, sent an extended cable, later known as "The Long Tele-
       gram," toSecretary of State James Byrnes, bluntly describing the Soviet
Union's inherent hostility toward the United States.
   "We have here," Kennan said, "a political force committed fanatically
to the belief that with the United States there can be no permanent
modus vivendi, that it is desirable and necessary that the internal har-
       mony of our society be disrupted, our traditional way of life be de-
             stroyed, the international authority of our state be broken, if Soviet

power is to be secure."
   Kennan's proposed response, recapitulated by him in an anonymous
article in Foreign Affairs in 1947, was to help shape American foreign
policy for the next four decades. Kennan called for Washington to resist
Soviet expansion by maintaining a global balance of economic and po-
       litical power that would discourage Moscow from trying to extend its
influence in Western Europe and Asia. Over time, Washington trans-
         formed the Kennan strategy into a doctrine that emphasized the role of
American and Western European military power in checking the Soviet
Union. This approach came to be known as the policy of containment.
  A few weeks after Kennan's telegram arrived in Washington, Win-
    ston Churchill, Britain's redoubtable wartime leader, distilled the un-
         folding conflict into an iconic phrase. On March 5, speaking at
Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, Churchill declared, "From
Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has de-
         scended across the Continent."
   A year later, faced with the possibility of Communist gains in Greece
and Turkey, President Truman formally committed the United States to
help free peoples around the world resist Soviet-inspired efforts to im-
     pose totalitarian regimes in their countries. The enunciation of the Tru-
     man Doctrine on March 12, 1947, was followed three months later by
the unveiling of the Marshall Plan, the inspired American program to
strengthen the development of democracy in Europe by providing
money for economic reconstruction. Czechoslovakia, the only Eastern
European country that still had a freely elected government, was eager
                        18        Secret     Empire


to participate in the plan, but Stalin blocked Czech involvement. A
Communist coup in February 1948 erased the last vestiges of democ-
    racy in Prague.
  At this stage, the Communist threat in Europe was primarily political
rather than military, and the United States still seemed secure from at-
      tack. The Soviet Union had emerged from the war with its economy
badly weakened and its western cities in ruins. Nearly 27 million Soviet
men and women had been lost in the war, a staggering blow to a nation
already shaken by Stalin's terror and bloody purges. Moscow's military
forces were victorious but battered. With a standing army of 4.5 million
men after postwar demobilization, the Soviet Union remained the pre-
         eminent land power in Europe. But it was not an air or naval power, and
lacked the long-range bombers needed to threaten the continental
United States. Though its scientists were working frantically to build an
atomic bomb, the Soviet Union had not yet tested one.
   The next few years changed all that. First came the Berlin blockade in
June 1948, the initial military crisis of the cold war. By closing down
road, rail, and river access to Western sectors in the divided city of
Berlin, the old German capital that was now locked inside Soviet-
controlled territory, Moscow hoped to dissuade the United States,
Britain, and France from establishing a separate West German state. A
Western airlift supplied the city with food and fuel for nearly a year, and
the crisis only accelerated Washington's efforts to consolidate its posi-
     tion in Europe. Unprepared for war, Stalin backed down by lifting the
blockade in May 1949. By then, the United States and its allies had cre-
      ated the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a military al-
         liance that would guarantee American defense of Western Europe and
put a quarter of a million American troops on the continent for the next
forty years.
   On August 29, 1949, the Soviet Union ended the American atomic
monopoly. The first Russian atomic bomb was tested at Semipalatinsk,
a remote site in the Kazakhstan steppe on the southern rim of the Soviet
Union. The blast leveled buildings in a 4-mile radius. In a preview of the
intelligence problems that were to haunt Washington in the years
ahead, the United States did not learn of the test until September 19,
           "Racing      Toward      Catastroimi      i         19

when an Air Force reconnaissance plane detected unusually high levels
of radiation in the atmosphere as it flew from Japan to Alaska. Other
planes confirmed the finding, and on the evening of September 19,
David Lilienthal, the head of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, re-
         turned tohis vacation home on Martha's Vineyard to find Gen. James
McCormack, a commission official, waiting for him in the fog. In a
room illuminated by a kerosene lamp, McCormack informed Lilienthal
of the Soviet test. The next morning Lilienthal flew to Washington to
tell President Truman.
  The danger of a Soviet surprise attack on the United States was be-
         ginning to gather. Two weeks after Washington's belated discovery of
the Russian atomic test, the Chinese Communists completed their rev-
       olution and proclaimed the establishment of the People's Republic of
China. The potential for cold war combat was realized on June 25,
1950, when Communist North Korea used its armored divisions to in-
      vade South Korea, easily overcoming the South 's weak defenses. Tru-
     man had just settled down for the evening at his home in Independence,
Missouri, when Secretary of State Dean Acheson called from Washing-
    ton to give him the news. Truman feared the invasion was the beginning
of World Warm.
   Three days later, the South Korean capital of Seoul was occupied. A
shaken but determined Truman ordered American air and naval forces
to come to the defense of South Korea. The United Nations voted the
same day to authorize the use of armed force to oppose the North Kore-
    ans. Braced by a bleak assessment from Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the
American commander in Asia, Truman approved the use of American
ground troops on June 30. The North Korean onslaught was halted far
to the south, outside the port of Pusan, which became the staging area
and resupply center for American forces on the peninsula. In mid-
September, 70,000 men of the Tenth Corps made an amphibious land-
    ing at Inchon on the North Korean coast, carrying out MacArthur's
audacious plan to attack behind enemy lines. The landing was successful
and within days more than half the North Korean army was encircled
and Seoul was liberated. The war seemed to be won, but MacArthur
pressed his luck by pushing deep into North Korea. The day after
                       20        Secret     Empire


Thanksgiving, China unexpectedly entered the conflict with an initial
force of 260,000 men.
   The Americans were driven back across the 38th parallel, the prewar
dividing line between North and South Korea, but neither side could
gain a decisive advantage in battle and the war soon settled into a costly,
demoralizing stalemate. Though Stalin had pressed the Chinese to
enter the war, he refrained from committing Soviet ground troops. An
armistice was finally signed on July 27, 1953, six months after Dwight
Eisenhower became president and four months after Stalin's death.
   The Korean War ended any illusions Americans may have had about
the new world order. The cold war was going to be protracted and
brutish. There might be other armed clashes in Asia and Europe. Most
ominously, the Soviet Union in 1953 was building a fleet of new high-
       speed, long-range bombers that could reach targets in the United States
and had demonstrated that it had matched the United States in the de-
     sign of advanced nuclear weaponry.
   On July 30, a military attache at the American embassy in Moscow
spotted a new Russian bomber on the tarmac at Ramenskoye airfield,
south of the capital. The airfield was attached to the Myacheslav Avia-
     tion Design Bureau, an incubator of new Soviet warplanes. The large
aircraft was notable for several reasons: It was Moscow's first jet-
powered heavy bomber, and its swept-back wings and other aerody-
        namic features demonstrated more advanced Soviet design skills than
American experts had anticipated. After years of building military air-
      craft based on the designs of American and British planes that had been
left behind in the Soviet Union during and after the war, Moscow now
had its first homegrown jet-powered bomber, and it appeared to be on a
par with the latest American bomber.
   The new aircraft was far different from anything previously seen in
the Soviet bomber fleet. Moscow had accelerated its production of tur-
         boprop bombers in the early 1950s. The Tupolev-16, designated the
Badger by NATO, was built for medium-range missions over Europe
and could not reach the United States. The Tupolev-95, or Bear, had
better range — 7,800 nautical miles, more than enough to reach Boston,
           "Racing      Toward       Catastrophic"               21


New York, and Washington — but like all turboprop planes, it was slow;
its flying time to American targets would be better than fifteen hours.
   The new plane, the Myacheslav-4, or Bison, was roughly the equiva-
      lent of the American B-52, which was just going into production at the
big Boeing Aircraft plant in Seattle. Equipped with four jet engines, the
Bison had a top airspeed of 560 mph, could carry a bomb load of 10,000
pounds, and cruise over 7,000 nautical miles without refueling. This was
more than enough distance and heft to deliver two atomic bombs to any
site on the American east coast.
   On August 12, 1953, the Soviet threat grew exponentially. Moscow
tested its first hydrogen, or thermonuclear, bomb. Barely nine months
had passed since the initial American test of a similar weapon at Eniwe-
tok Atoll in the South Pacific. The speed of Soviet progress astonished
American officials, who had not expected to see the first Soviet H-bomb
test for at least three or four more years.
  Andrei Sakharov, one of the architects of the Soviet H-bomb, de-
        scribed the menacing blast at the Kazakh test site. "We saw a flash, and
then a swiftly expanding white ball lit up the whole horizon. I tore off
my goggles, and though I was partially blinded by the glare, I could see
a stupendous cloud trailing streamers of purple dust. The cloud turned
gray, quickly separated from the ground and swirled upward, shimmer-
     ing with gleams of orange. The customary mushroom cloud gradually
formed, but the stem connecting it to the ground was much thicker than
those shown in photographs of fission explosions. More and more dust
was sucked up at the base of the stem, spreading out swiftly. The shock
wave blasted my ears and struck a sharp blow to my entire body; then
there was a prolonged, ominous rumble that slowly died away after
thirty seconds or so. Within minutes, the cloud, which now filled half
the sky, turned a sinister blue-black color."
   The development of fusion weapons by Washington and Moscow
sharply escalated the potential devastation of a nuclear war. In creating
explosive energy, fusing two atoms together was three to four times
more efficient than splitting the atoms apart, the technique used in
atomic or fission bombs. The design and engineering of hydrogen
                       22       Secret     Empire


weapons also theoretically made it possible to generate the greater ex-
         plosive power from bombs that were much smaller and lighter than
their atomic cousins.
   The practical result was astounding. The explosion that Sakharov
witnessed, and the earlier American tests, represented a revolution in
weapons since the final conventional air raids of World War II that was
almost beyond comprehension. In less than a decade, the explosive
power of a 10,000-pound bomb had gone from 5,000 pounds of TNT
to more than 10 billion pounds of TNT Yet the actual weight of the
bomb was no different.
   Even more powerful yet smaller weapons were thought to be possi-
     ble. Initial estimates that the minimum weight of a hydrogen bomb
would be a backbreaking 9,000 pounds were quickly erased. By the end
of 1953, the Strategic Missile Evaluation Committee, a panel of scien-
      tists and engineers appointed by Trevor Gardner to review the state of
American missile technology, reported that nuclear warheads weighing
no more than 1,500 pounds could someday be built, small enough to be
carried between continents by a missile.
   The notion of placing a compact but powerful nuclear weapon atop a
missile that could streak through space, crossing the North Pole in
thirty minutes, was stunning. Any nation that mastered that technology
would have a tremendous military advantage. Though the prospect of
coupling nuclear warheads with intercontinental ballistic missiles still
seemed remote in 1953, there were already signs that the Russians were
breaking ahead of the United States in rocket technology.
   As the Red Army advanced westward in the spring of 1944, the Rus-
      sians had captured the Nazi V-2 rocket center at Peenemiinde, located
on an island just off the Baltic Sea coast of eastern Germany. In October
1946, more than five thousand German technicians and twenty thou-
      sand family members were brought to Moscow to jump-start Soviet
rocket projects. The Russians, led by several gifted scientists, including
Sergei Korolyov, had done pioneering work in rocket science in the
1930s and had founded the Rocket Research Development Center in
Moscow in 1932. The Kremlin launched its first rocket in August 1933.
Indeed, some of the earliest thinking about rockets had come from a
            "Racing      Toward        Catastrophe"                2.3

Russian, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, a schoolteacher born in 1857 who had
been inspired by reading Jules Verne. In a 1903 article that was not
translated and published outside Russia, Tsiolkovsky described how a
rocket could be built using liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen as fuel —
nearly two decades before Robert H. Goddard, an American, came up
with the same idea. But Moscow's efforts to produce reliable rockets,
and use them in warfare, were disabled temporarily by the arrest and
imprisonment of Korolyov in 1937 on charges that he was involved in
anti-Soviet activities.
   The Soviet program was reassembled after the war with the release of
Korolyov and the arrival of the Germans. In 1947, a missile test site was
opened at Kapustin Yar, in the Soviet republic of the Ukraine. Not long
after it opened, Washington learned about the missile base from
Britain's intelligence services. More detailed information arrived in the
early 1950s when some of the German engineers who had been moved
to Moscow were repatriated to East Germany and fled to the West.
Though the Russians had carefully excluded the Germans from the
most advanced aspects of the missile program, the Germans knew about
Kapustin Yar and filled in British and American intelligence officials in
September 1952 . A month later, the Air Force brought some of the Ger-
      man engineers to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio to be de-
briefed.
  An incomplete but disturbing picture of the Soviet program was
pieced together by the British and Americans and presented to policy-
            makers inJuly 1953 as a joint intelligence report. The Russians, build-
    ing on the V-2 technology acquired from the Germans, were trying to
produce a medium-range missile that could reach any site in Europe. By
1956, the report said, Moscow was likely to have a missile with a range
of 2,275 nautical miles — enough to hit London. It was clear that it
would only be a matter of a few more years before the Soviet Union
came up with a missile that could strike Washington.
  To get a closer look at the Soviet test site, the British modified an RAF
B-2 Canberra bomber for a spy flight over Kapustin Yar. The plane
could not be refueled, but with extra gas tanks installed in the bomb bay,
it had the range to fly from West Germany across Eastern Europe and
                        24       Secret      Empire


the Ukraine. In late August 1953, the airplane, outfitted with reconnais-
       sance cameras, took off from Giebelstadt in West Germany in daylight,
which was necessary for photographing the missile base but left the
plane vulnerable to Soviet air defenses. The Canberra was hit by gunfire
as it dodged Soviet fighters, but managed to get pictures of the missile
complex and then fly on to Iran, where it landed. The mission, however,
was a failure. Vibrations produced by the damage to the plane made the
pictures so blurred they were all but useless.
   The muddy photographs were a perfect metaphor for the intelligence
problems Washington faced as Eisenhower and his aides tried to assess
and respond to the rising Soviet threat, especially the danger of surprise
attack. No one in Washington could be certain how much progress the
Russians were making, but it was apparent from everything that was
known that Moscow was working feverishly to build an offensive nu-
     clear strike force.
  Looking back at this period years later, Lawrence Houston, the gen-
    eral counsel of the CIA in the 1950s, said the lack of reliable intelligence
information "was just appalling."
   "We just didn't have it— any real information," he explained. "We
just didn't know what was going on."
   Richard Helms, then a rising young CIA intelligence officer, remem-
        bered how little he and his colleagues knew about the Soviet military.
"There was an extraordinary absence of knowledge," he recalled in an
interview in 1999. "It was totally frustrating trying to learn anything, no
matter how hard we tried or how imaginative we were. Eisenhower was
sorely pressed to know what his enemy was about."
   The intelligence vacuum was intolerable. Gardner knew it when he
went to see Lee DuB ridge at Caltech. The May 1954 flight of Hal
Austin and his crew was just another measure of the desperate need for
better intelligence about Soviet armaments. The American government
was essentially unable to pry open the "Iron Curtain" to learn more
about the state of Soviet military forces. Airmen like Austin were risking
their lives to fly near or over the Soviet Union, and others, less fortunate
than Austin, had been killed when their planes were shot down during
           "Racing       Toward      Catastrophe"                25

flights along the Soviet border. Aside from modified bombers like the
RB-47E, Washington's most exotic overhead reconnaissance system at
the time was a fleet of camera-carrying helium balloons that the Air
Force launched into the jet stream, hoping they would drift over the So-
     viet Union, take pictures of military installations, and be recovered
when they reached the western Pacific. Most were shot down or fell to
earth in Siberia.
   Espionage operations on the ground were no better. The suffocating
security apparatus of the Soviet police state made it exceedingly difficult
to recruit spies in Russia or to plant agents in the Soviet military and in-
            telligence services. The Central Intelligence Agency, which had been
established by President Truman in 1947, learned what little it could
about Russian military forces by interviewing thousands of Soviet citi-
     zens who had emigrated to the West after World War II. Their accounts
were spotty and unreliable. Nazi photographs of Soviet factories and
military bases, shipped to Washington after the German surrender,
were useful but dated. The Agency's best information about the Soviet
rocket and missile programs came from the German rocket engineers,
and was already badly outdated.
   After taking office in January 1953, Eisenhower had complained
often and sometimes angrily about the lack of hard intelligence infor-
        mation about the Soviet Union, whether the issue was Kremlin politics
or Russian military power. The European battles of World War II had
taught him about the risks of operating without information about
enemy forces. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, Eisenhower's staff secretary
during most of his years in the White House, said, "Eisenhower's expe-
       rience at the Battle of the Bulge, where the Germans secretly amassed a
major force unbeknownst to Allied intelligence, deeply impressed upon
him the value as well as the limitations of intelligence, together with the
dangers of being caught off guard."
  When he convened his cabinet on March 6, 1953, the day after
Stalin's death, Eisenhower was in a testy mood. "Ever since 1946," he
said, "I know that all the so-called experts have been yapping about what
would happen when Stalin dies and what we, as a nation, should do
                        26        Secret     Empire


about it. Well, he's dead. And you can turn the files of our government
inside out — in vain — looking for any plans laid. We have no plan. We
are not even sure what difference his death makes."
  At the end of April, Eisenhower told his cabinet, "There can be no ac-
       curate prediction as to when, if ever, the enemy will attack."
  The absence of reliable intelligence about Soviet military forces was
maddening and unsettling. Divining the intentions of foreign leaders
was nearly impossible, and always had been among the hardest objec-
      tives ofany intelligence service. But counting the number of bombers at
an airfield, or warships at a naval base, and determining the state of the
Soviet missile program seemed more reasonable goals. Yet in 1954 they
were largely unattainable through conventional espionage methods.
   The CIA ground out reports about the strength of Soviet forces, but
these top-secret papers, known as National Intelligence Estimates
(NIEs), often sounded much more authoritative than they actually
were. In truth, the numbers in them were soft, not much better than ed-
        ucated guesses about how many nuclear bombs or long-range bombers
Moscow possessed or was expected to have on hand in the years ahead.
The analysts who prepared the reports were working with almost no
hard facts.
   Not surprisingly, the absence of reliable information led to a wide va-
      riety ofpredictions about Soviet military strength, with the CIA usually
on the conservative side and the Air Force at the high end, warning that
Moscow was overtaking Washington in airpower and might soon
achieve clear superiority. General LeMay had been sounding the alarm
for several years, and other concerned Air Force officials, mindful of
supporting their requests for budget increases, were providing congres-
       sional leaders with frightening estimates about the size and reach of a
growing Soviet air force.
  The implications were unnerving. Eisenhower did not know whether
the Soviet Union was preparing to attack the United States. He ex-
       pected to get little, if any, warning if an assault were imminent, and he
had no solid information about how many nuclear weapons and delivery
systems Moscow could direct at American targets. The dismaying con-
        clusion ofa high-level 1951 study of American defenses remained true:
            "Racing       Toward       Catastrophe"                 27


"The problem of defense of the United States against air attack is char-
         acterized above all by lack of knowledge of what we have to defend
against. The enemy has the initiative. Our intelligence tells us essen-
      tially nothing about his plans; informs us only partially about his present
capabilities; and, as to his future capabilities, leaves us essentially depen-
      dent on assumptions that he can, if he chooses, do about as well in any
aspect as we expect to do ourselves."
   In the nuclear age, such ignorance was untenable. Americans had dis-
           covered the cost of intelligence failure at Pearl Harbor in 1941. Eisen-
        hower knew that a surprise nuclear attack by the Soviet Union would be
far more damaging to the nation and its military forces than the Japa-
      nese attack on Pearl Harbor. In March 1954, Eisenhower told aides he

was "haunted" by the threat of surprise attack. A year later, addressing a
summit of world leaders in Geneva, he said, "Surprise attack has a ca-
       pacity for destruction far beyond anything which man has yet known."
   The level of expected destruction was unfathomable. A nuclear attack
would obliterate cities, kill millions of Americans, destroy a large por-
     tion of the nation's industrial base, poison its food and water supplies,
and cripple its financial institutions. More than half the population was
likely to require medical care. Economic collapse and government de-
                 capitation were likely. The detonation of a single 10-megaton bomb
over Washington would kill or injure more than a million people and re-
       duce the capital to rubble, requiring the states to form a new federal
government.
  Even if an attack never came, the fear of one, fueled by the absence of
intelligence, was potentially debilitating to the United States. Faced
with such a severe threat, the White House had no choice but to do
everything possible to defend the country. Yet in the absence of reliable
information about the precise nature of Soviet forces, both offensive
and defensive, there was a high risk that the country would build de-
       fenses and weapons that did not match the threat, or invest in military
programs that were unnecessary. The drain could be great not only on
the federal treasury but on the entire economy and health of American
democracy.
   Eisenhower anguished over this possibility. He had articulated his
                       28       Secret     Empire


concerns on April 16, 1953, a month after Stalin's death, in a speech to
the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
   "The worst to be feared and the best to be expected can be simply
stated," he told the news executives, who had gathered at the Statler
Hotel.
  "The worst is atomic war.
   "The best would be this: a life of perpetual fear and tension; a burden
of arms draining the wealth and the labor of all peoples; a wasting of
strength that defies the American or the Soviet system or any system to
achieve true abundance and happiness for the peoples of this earth.
   "Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired
signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not
fed, those who are cold and not clothed."
   "The cost of one modern heavy bomber is this: a modern brick school
in more than 30 cities.

   "It is two electric power plants, each serving a town of 60,000 popula-
tion.

  "It is two finely equipped hospitals.
  "It is some 50 miles of concrete highway.
   "We pay for a single fighter with a half million bushels of wheat.
   "We pay for a single destroyer with new homes that could have
housed more than 8,000 people.
   "This, I repeat, is the best way of life to be found on the road the
world has been taking.
  "This is not a way of life at all, in any true sense. Under the cloud of
threatening war, it is humanity hanging from a cross of iron."
   Better intelligence was the key to easing these pressures. Edwin
Land, the prolific inventor and creator of instant photography who
came to play a pivotal role in the development of new spy technologies,
later summed up the equation nicely. "We simply cannot afford to de-
      fend against all possible threats," Land said. "We must know accurately
where the threat is coming from and concentrate our resources in that
direction. Only by doing so can we survive the cold war."
   Thanks in part to Trevor Gardner, the gateway to a new era in intelli-
       gence gathering was being pushed open by the White House as word of
           "Racing      Toward      Catastrophe"               29


Hal Austin's narrow escape was flashed back to Washington on May 8,
1954. After the harsh lecture from Gardner, Lee DuBridge invited him
to address the next meeting of the Science Advisory Committee. Gard-
     ner impressed the panel members and DuBridge soon spoke with
Arthur Flemming, the head of the Office of Defense Mobilization, a
White House office that supervised the work of the committee. Flem-
       ming, in turn, suggested that the advisory panel meet with Eisenhower.
   The meeting was held at 9:30 on Saturday morning, March 27, 1954,
in the Cabinet Room of the White House. DuBridge was accompanied
by thirteen other members of the committee, among them some of the
leading scientists and science administrators in the country, including
Detlev W. Bronk, the president of the National Academy of Sciences;
Oliver E. Buckley, the head of Bell Laboratories; and 1. 1. Rabi, a physi-
     cist at Columbia University. In addition to Eisenhower, Donald A.
Quarles, the assistant secretary of defense for research and development
and a champion of new military technologies, attended from the admin-
istration.
  Eisenhower told the committee about the discovery the previous year
of the new Soviet intercontinental bomber, the jet-powered Bison. He
warned that the new aircraft might eventually be used to attack Amer-
    ica. James R. Killian Jr., the president of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and a member of the science committee, later recalled the
conversation: "Eisenhower directed the discussion to the danger of a
surprise attack on the United States and stressed the high priority he
gave to reducing the probability of military surprise. Modern weapons,
he warned, had made it easier for a hostile nation with a closed society to
plan an attack in secrecy and thus gain an advantage denied to the nation
with an open society."
   Eisenhower told the group, "To anyone bearing the responsibility for
the security of the United States, the situation was highly unsatisfac-
       tory." He asked the committee to advise him on how to deal with the
threat of surprise attack.
   A fresh look at the problem and ways to ameliorate it seemed advis-
      able. DuBridge asked Killian to meet as soon as possible in Cambridge
with committee members who lived in the Northeast. On Thursday,
                        30       Secret      Empire


April 15, a small group of men including Oliver Buckley and Edwin
Land assembled in Killian's Cambridge office. They agreed a special
task force should be appointed to conduct an intensive review of
America's vulnerability to surprise attack, and to recommend steps to
lessen the danger. The recommendation, which Eisenhower would
soon approve, was awaiting presidential action on the day Hal Austin
flew over Murmansk.
  The day before, Vietminh forces had overrun the French garrison in
Dien Bien Phu after a fifty-five-day siege, ending France's colonial role
in Vietnam. Few Americans could have imagined that the victory of Ho
Chi Minh's forces would open a long, tortured path to an American war
in Indochina, but the French defeat did increase fears in Washington of
a Communist advance in Southeast Asia. Before going to the Burning
Tree Club in suburban Maryland to play golf, Eisenhower had sum-
        moned his top national security aides to the Cabinet Room to review the
developments in Vietnam.
   Closer to home, the capital and nation were riveted by Senator
Joseph McCarthy's reckless assault on the loyalty of the leadership of
the U.S. Army, the latest front in his demagogic hunt for Communists
in the government. Eisenhower was belatedly but forcefully challenging
the Wisconsin senator; even some of McCarthy's allies in Congress, in-
        cluding Senator John McClellan of Louisiana, were questioning his tac-
tics.
  Most Americans were only beginning to awake to the danger of sur-
     prise attack in the spring of 1954. On Saturday, May 1, a week before
Austin's mission, the Bison bomber had made its public debut by flying
over Red Square during the annual May Day parade. Though only one
bomber joined the air show over Moscow, its appearance was startling,
since word of the plane's initial sighting in 1953 had not circulated
widely outside the government. The appearance of the giant bomber
was page-one news in the United States the next day. A few days later,
the New York Times for the first time printed a photograph of the plane
as it passed over Red Square. An accompanying news story, based on
photographs that had been published on Sunday by Pravda, the Com-
        munist Party newspaper, noted that "The new craft is believed to be an
            "Racing      Toward       Catastrophe"                 31


intercontinental bomber similar to the United States B-52 and capable
of delivering nuclear weapons to distant targets."
   The American people were hardly oblivious to the dangers of the
cold war. Fifty-five thousand had died fighting in Korea. The threat of
nuclear war produced a constant sense of anxiety that was like a low-
grade fever that the nation could not shake. It was reflected in growing
efforts to promote the construction of fallout shelters and other civil de-
       fense projects. On December 18, 1950, Life magazine had published a
long article entitled "How U.S. Cities Can Prepare for Atomic War."
   Yet for all the uncertainty about the future, American life in 1954 was
good and getting better. Prosperity was spreading, the middle class was
growing, suburbs were springing up around the cities, and the disloca-
     tion and sacrifices of World War II were starting to fade into memory.
The nation's population was 162 million, an increase of nearly 20 per-
      cent since 1940. The unemployment rate was 5.5 percent. More than
half of American households had a television set, three times as many as
in 1946, and two-thirds of American families owned a car, compared to
just over half in 1948.
  Just a month before Austin's flight, Newsweek captured the ambiva-
    lent mood of the nation with a cover photograph of two attractive young
women driving a convertible covered with stickers of vacation destina-
        tions. The shot called attention to the issue's special report on "Spring-
Summer Travel." But printed across the top of the cover was a reference
to another special section in the same issue: "The Bomb: What Odds for
Survival Now?"
   Trevor Gardner and Jim Killian knew the odds of preventing a nu-
      clear war would improve if the United States knew more about the So-
      viet Union's military strengths and weaknesses and could manage
relations with Moscow accordingly. But as the Eisenhower administra-
     tion gathered itself in the spring and summer of 1954 to face the threat
of surprise attack, the obstacles to gaining that knowledge were im-
mense.
  The idea of developing less vulnerable, more effective ways of photo-
              graphing Soviet military installations had been kicking around Wash-
      ington for years. In fact, the first scheme for placing a satellite in space
                          32        Secret       Empire


was dreamed up for the Pentagon in 1946 by the engineering division of
the Douglas Aircraft Company in Santa Monica. This research shop,
later detached from Douglas and rechristened the RAND Corporation,
became a vital source of ideas for the Air Force. By the time of Hal
Austin's narrow escape, detailed work was under way to design a space-
      craft that could take pictures of the Soviet Union and relay them elec-
                  tronically back to earth. The Air Force was also trying to produce a
reconnaissance airplane that could fly high enough to elude Soviet in-
           terceptors and missiles. But none of these efforts had the support of the
White House or the financial backing needed to overcome the techno-
        logical barriers that confronted scientists and engineers.
   The challenges seemed nearly insurmountable. No one had yet come
close to firing a rocket into space, much less a sophisticated surveillance
system. Even if a powerful enough rocket could be built, it was unclear
whether a camera system could survive the jolting ride into space and
function in the hostile conditions there, including temperatures of 455
degrees below zero Fahrenheit. If useful pictures could be taken from
space, relaying the images back to earth would require either a new
means of transmission or the development of a film-return capsule that
would not burn up during the scorching reentry through the atmo-
         sphere. As for new spy planes, the upper reaches of the atmosphere re-
          mained an unknown zone filled with potentially lethal dangers for any
man or machine that ventured to such heights. Jet engines would flame
out for lack of oxygen above 70,000 feet, and fluids in the human body
would vaporize at that altitude.
   Fortunately, the first concrete steps were being taken to develop the
revolutionary new technologies that were required. Kelly Johnson, the
top aircraft designer at Lockheed, was pitching the Air Force on his lat-
    est proposal for a new spy plane that could cruise over the Soviet Union
at 70,000 feet. Lockheed was also working with the Air Force on plans
for a photoreconnaissance satellite. Though much of the Air Force high
command had little interest in either idea, a young general named
Bernard Schriever recognized the potential importance of both and was
using his influence to press for their development.
   Two other talented men would soon be drawn into pivotal leadership
            "Racing       Toward       Catastrophe"                 33


roles in the effort to upgrade America's intelligence operations. One of
them was Edwin Land. The weekend Hal Austin was penetrating Soviet
airspace, Land was indulging one of his periodic impulses to break with
the conventions of business and science. He was in Hollywood, where
he had taken up temporary residence to work with Alfred Hitchcock on
making 3-D movies. The other person was Richard M. Bissell Jr., a bril-
      liant, eccentric economist who had recently started work at the Central
Intelligence Agency as a special assistant to its director, Allen W. Dulles.
   Thanks to these men and others who believed that the preservation of
democracy and freedom required the creation of radically new technical
systems for collecting intelligence, the leap was made. Before the year
was out, the Eisenhower administration set in motion a series of secret
studies and projects that over the short span of the next six years would
revolutionize the intelligence business and profoundly alter the course
of the cold war.
  In this period of explosive innovation, the nation would produce the
U-2 spy plane, which could cruise at 75,000 feet, and started work on a
successor aircraft so advanced that it would be considered a startling en-
           gineering feat if proposed today. In the late summer of 1960, the United
States placed the first successful reconnaissance satellite in orbit. Along
the way, the scientists, engineers, businessmen, and government offi-
      cials who worked on these highly classified programs rewrote the book
on airplane design and performance and led the nation into space. They
transformed the world of espionage by building machines that in a day
could collect more information about a foreign enemy than an army of
spies could assemble in a decade, and opened the way to a sea change in
warfare made possible by the development of space-based reconnais-
       sance, mapping, communications, and targeting systems. Altogether, it
was a triumph of American ingenuity and technology, the cold war
equivalent of the Manhattan Project.
  Like the invention of the bomb, and the development of interconti-
        nental ballistic missiles that also raced ahead in the late 1950s, the cre-
      ation of new spy systems reshaped the political, bureaucratic, and
budgetary landscape in Washington in both constructive and destruc-
    tive ways that continue to be felt half a century later. Huge new govern-
                       34       Secret      Empire


ment organizations were created to manage and exploit the new
technologies, billions of dollars were diverted to fund them, and bitter
debates were joined over how to manage the systems and how much to
rely on them. The struggle for control provoked a boiling conflict be-
       tween the Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon that has yet to
be resolved.
   But the immediate payoff from the reconnaissance advances was a
stream of new, reliable information about Soviet military forces. The
photographs provided by the U-2 and, later, the first satellites gave
Washington its first real look at Moscow's military machine, including
air and naval bases, bombers, missile test sites, submarines, and radar
systems. As Albert D. "Bud" Wheelon, one of the men who developed
the new generation of spy systems, later said, "It was as if an enormous
floodlight had been turned on in a darkened warehouse."
                          CHAPTER           TWO




                 The Origins of
              Strategic Intelligence

No       one person can fairly be called the progenitor of the recon-
               naissance revolution, but Richard S. Leghorn comes as close as
anyone to fitting the description. He vividly remembers the day when
his thoughts about the future of reconnaissance crystallized. It was July
25, 1946.
   Leghorn was a twenty-seven-year-old tactical reconnaissance pilot,
one of the best in the U.S. Army Air Forces. As commander of the 30th
Photo Reconnaissance Squadron (67th Photo Reconnaissance Group)
during the war, he had seen the consequences of combat during many
missions over Nazi-occupied Europe. A few days after the Allied land-
     ing at Normandy on June 6, 1944, he walked among the dead and
wounded at Omaha beach. Yet none of this prepared him for the sober-
   ing scene he witnessed on that summer day in 1946.
  The sun was already scalding as Colonel Leghorn boarded a B-29 air-
     craft at Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands, an archipelago of
twenty-nine atolls and five islands scattered across the central Pacific,
just above the equator. Leghorn, along with hundreds of other Ameri-
     can soldiers, sailors, and airmen, had been dispatched to the area to help
test the country's latest nuclear weapons. Washington knew what de-
          struction had been caused at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but the nuclear
age was still in its infancy and the Pentagon wanted to measure the
power of atomic bombs in more controlled circumstances and specifi-
     cally tolearn how effective they might be against naval vessels.

                                      35
                         36        Secret      Empire


  The Marshall Islands had been picked as a nuclear proving ground
because of their remote location, small population, and status as an
American protectorate. The 167 residents of Bikini Atoll had reluc-
      tantly agreed in February to evacuate their homes after Commodore
Ben H. Wyatt, the military governor of the islands, told them the
United States needed to test nuclear weapons there "for the good of
mankind and to end all world wars."
   Operation Crossroads, the code name for the tests, commenced on
July 1 when a bomb, roughly as powerful as the one that had been
dropped over Hiroshima, exploded in the air over Bikini Lagoon. A
floating junkyard of warships, including surplus American cruisers, de-
          stroyers, and submarines, as well as vessels captured from Japan and
Germany during the war, was arrayed in the translucent waters of
the bay.
  Leghorn had returned to active duty in April to serve as deputy com-
          mander ofTask Force 1.52, the group of more than five hundred offi-
    cers, enlisted men, and civilians responsible for photographing the tests.
The unit had more than three hundred cameras of various sizes.
Leghorn and his colleagues manned a B-29 bomber and a C-54 trans-
     port plane that had been modified to carry cameras and a variety of
measuring devices. The explosion of the first bomb, called Able, buf-
     feted these planes, and the fireball and mushroom cloud that punctuated
the Pacific sky were sights he would never forget. But it was the second
test, an underwater explosion on July 25, that led Leghorn to revise his
views on the nature and consequences of war, an epiphany that would
come to play a major role in the development of new reconnaissance
technologies.
   Leghorn peered down from the B-29 cockpit window as the bomb,
called Baker, was detonated 90 feet below the surface of the lagoon. The
sea heaved, as though lifted from the ocean floor by some elemental
force. As Leghorn watched in disbelief, the vessels still afloat in the la-
       goon after the earlier test were tossed into the air like beach balls. A Jap-
         anese cruiser, the Nagato, levitated clear of the water, and a Japanese
battleship was thrown 400 yards. When they settled back into the water,
eight of the vessels slowly sank below the waves.
     The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                                        37


   "I knew at that moment we couldn't have another war," Leghorn re-
       called many years later, seated at his home on a mountain ridge in south-
           western New Mexico.
   The explosion in Bikini Lagoon spurred Leghorn to reflect on ways
aerial reconnaissance could help the Pentagon and White House keep
the peace. In the weeks before the atomic tests, Leghorn had read a
summary of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey, which examined
the damage that Allied bombers had inflicted on Germany during the
war. Leghorn could see that better reconnaissance information would
have been invaluable in directing the bombing campaign — the survey
noted that there had never been a systematic effort to knock out the
Nazi electric grid. Because war planners were primarily interested in
pinpointing Nazi troop concentrations and the location of tanks and ar-
       tillery, insufficient attention had been given to German steel factories
and other industrial sites shown in the thousands of reconnaissance
photos that might have helped guide the bombing campaign.
   As Leghorn studied the report and discussed it with colleagues, he
also realized that better intelligence could help prevent a new war by
eliminating the fear of surprise attack. The bombing survey report un-
           derscored the dangers posed by new technologies of warfare in a con-
        cluding section that said, "The combination of the atomic bomb with
remote-control projectiles of ocean-spanning range stands as a possibil-
   ity which is awesome and frightful to contemplate."
   Drawing on his experience as a reconnaissance pilot, Leghorn con-
          cluded that the best way to avoid a nuclear war was to give the White
House and Pentagon as much information as possible about potential
aggressors well in advance of any attack on the United States. This
could be done by monitoring the military forces and industrial installa-
      tions of potential enemies on a sustained basis so that Washington
would fully know the strength of its opponents and could detect prepa-
             rations for war in time to head off a conflict or at least be ready to retal-
    iate in kind.
   The concept, which came to be known as strategic reconnaissance,
was quite different from the more familiar notion of tactical or combat
reconnaissance, which military commanders had employed for cen-
                         38        Secret      Empire


turies to gain an advantage in war. Tactical reconnaissance involved the
collection of information about enemy forces for use in preparing and
directing a battle. Leghorn himself had flown numerous missions along
the French coast in the weeks before D-Day to determine where Ger-
      man troops were positioned and to see if reinforcements were being
sent to the area. He made additional flights during and after the invasion
to monitor the fighting and to alert Allied commanders to the move-
      ment of German units.
   His new idea called for peacetime, or prehostilities, reconnaissance,
an idea alien to most military commanders, who were accustomed to
making use of intelligence information primarily in wartime. Indeed,
the idea challenged some of the basic rules of military intelligence oper-
        ations. Itwas fair game, for example, to send spy planes over enemy ter-
       ritory during a war. But doing so in peacetime was considered an act of
aggression that could itself provoke a war.
   Leghorn was well aware of the difference, and realized that his ap-
        proach would require the invention of new high-altitude aircraft that
could elude detection. As an MIT-trained physicist, he saw no reason
why specialized spy planes could not be designed to fly high enough to
avoid air defense forces, or even be coated or fabricated with materials
that would make them invisible to radar.
  When the nuclear tests in the Pacific ended, Leghorn returned to the
United States and retired from the Army Air Forces, but remained in
the reserves. He didn't stop thinking about the need for strategic recon-
            naissance, and set to work to convert the Pentagon. He spent the fall of
1946 assembling his ideas, and then presented them in Boston on Fri-
     day, December 13, at a symposium that marked the opening of the
Boston University Optical Research Laboratory.
  The occasion was well chosen. Much of the most inventive and im-
         portant work in designing high-quality lenses for aerial photography
during the war had been done for the Army Air Forces at Harvard Uni-
        versity, under the direction of James G. Baker, a brilliant young as-
              tronomer and lens maker. When the war ended, Harvard president
James Conant wanted to return the university to purely civilian research
and ordered the optical lab closed and its vibration-resistant brick build-
    The     Origins      of Strategic         Intelligence                39


ing dismantled. Fearing the loss of the country's most creative optical
research center, several of Leghorn's wartime colleagues had helped
arrange for Boston University to house it. Baker remained at Harvard,
but his assistant, Duncan E. MacDonald, moved to BU to direct the
work. MacDonald, a lens designer, had served with Leghorn on Task
Force 1.52 during the atomic tests, as had a number of other gifted pho-
          tographic specialists who attended the Boston dedication ceremony.
   Leghorn outlined his ideas in a speech he titled "Objectives for Re-
       search and Development in Military Aerial Reconnaissance." Though it
received little public notice, the address was one of the most visionary
documents of the cold war and laid the basis for a new era in overhead
intelligence.
   "The nature of atomic warfare," Leghorn told the audience, "is such
that once attacks are launched against us, it will be extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to recover from them and counterattack successfully.
Therefore, it obviously becomes essential that we have prior knowledge
of the possibility of an attack, for defensive action against it must be
taken before it is launched."
   "For these reasons," he continued, "it is extraordinarily important
that a means of long-range aerial reconnaissance be devised which can-
     not be detected. . . . The accomplishment of this objective is not as
technically difficult as it might first appear. Extremely long-range air-
       craft, capable of flying at very high altitudes, are currently on the draw-
     ing boards, and in some cases prototypes have been constructed.
Effective means of camouflaging them at high altitudes against visual
observations are well known. It is not inconceivable to think that means
of preventing telltale reflections of other electromagnetic wave lengths,
particularly of radar frequency, can be developed."
   Leghorn was looking so far beyond the horizon that most military of-
        ficials dismissed his proposals. In 1946, the Army Air Forces, which
would become the U.S. Air Force in 1947, were more interested in
building new bombers and fighters than in designing exotic spy planes
that could fly at the upper edge of the atmosphere. Aerial reconnais-
       sance, in their terms, primarily meant overflying enemy territory in
wartime to select targets for bombing and to identify air defense threats.
                          40        Secret      Empire


   Fortunately, Leghorn was not the only person who understood the
need to expand the frontiers of overhead reconnaissance. Several of the
men he had worked with before and during the war had come to a simi-
    lar conclusion, including two of the country's aviation pioneers and top
air commanders, Gen. Henry H. Arnold and Brig. Gen. George W.
Goddard.
   General Arnold, the chief of the Army Air Forces during World War
II, recognized the intelligence demands of a new and uncertain age in
November 1945, less than four months after the end of the war. He told
Secretary of War Robert Patterson that henceforth Washington would
need "continuous knowledge of potential enemies," including all as-
      pects of their "political, social, industrial, scientific and military life" if
America's leaders were to have advance "warning of impending danger."
Presaging Leghorn's comments a year later, Arnold, who was soon to
retire, advised Patterson that such information could not be obtained
through traditional spying methods.
  Indeed, it was the fortuitous intersection of the careers of Arnold,
Goddard, and Leghorn, and of other men in the Army Air Corps in the
1930s and 1940s, that created the theoretical and practical foundation
for the overhead reconnaissance revolution of the 1950s. (The name of
the air groups was changed to the Army Air Forces in 1941 .)
   The wartime incubator of the most advanced overhead camera sys-
      tems was the Aeronautical Photographic Laboratory at Wright Field,
near Dayton, Ohio. This small, obscure workshop was the birthplace of
modern aerial reconnaissance. George Goddard, no relation to the
American rocket designer Robert H. Goddard, ran the lab during the
war, combining bold ideas and a fine eye for talent to create a research
center that bubbled with innovation.
   Goddard and Arnold, who as Army Air Forces commander was effec-
      tively owner of the lab, were well matched. Though they come from
very different backgrounds — Goddard was born an Englishman, the
son of an insurance agent; Arnold came from a family that traced its mil-
      itary service back to the Revolutionary War — they were ardent believers
in aerial reconnaissance and wholeheartedly committed to the develop-
       ment of new technologies.
    The    Origins      of Strategic         Intelligence               41


  Almost as soon as he learned to fly, Henry Harley Arnold, better
known as "Hap" Arnold, started experimenting with airplanes as plat-
      forms for photography. As he worked his way up the Army hierarchy, he
was constantly looking for ways to advance aviation technology. Long
before most military colleagues, he recognized the assistance that out-
     side scientists and engineers could provide. Arnold eventually became
impatient with the glacial pace of the Army's research and development
efforts. In 1930, the Army's latest observation plane, the Douglas 0-38,
would fly no faster than 130 mph. "What the hell have we gained in
twenty years?" he complained to his son, Hank. "Nothing." Arnold's re-
         sponse was to build his own research network among scientists and busi-
                  nessmen, including the aerodynamicist Theodore von Karman and
airplane builders like Glenn Curtiss, Elmer Sperry, Donald Douglas,
and Larry Bell.
   By the time he assumed command of the Army's air units in 1938,
Arnold had forged ties with Caltech, which had the best wind tunnels on
the West Coast. Arnold had gotten to know von Karman, who was di-
       rector ofthe Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Caltech and the
master of the wind tunnels and other aviation research operations at the
campus. Together, Arnold and von Karman deepened the collaboration
between the Army and the college, leading to creation of the Jet Propul-
     sion Laboratory.
   It was a mutually beneficial arrangement and a model of things to
come in other areas of military technology, including the Manhattan
Project and the invention of new spy technologies. For von Karman and
Caltech, the stream of funding from the Army was like an intravenous
line to the U.S. Treasury that supported rocket and electronic research
at the school. For Arnold, Caltech was a bountiful source of new ideas
and technologies for his air force.
   George Goddard was another innovator, though his work was more
narrowly focused on aerial reconnaissance and drew more directly on
his own technical creativity. Goddard made his first aerial reconnais-
      sance flight in 1918, not long after the end of World War I. Aerial work
in those early years was hair-raising. The photographer would stand up
in the open rear cockpit of a plane, held in place by a single leather strap.
                         42        Secret     Empire


As the pilot guided the plane over the target area, usually at an elevation
of 12,000 to 15,000 feet where breathing became difficult, the operator
would point a 10-pound camera earthward and activate the shutter.
Goddard went aloft for the first time on a windy, overcast day in
Rochester, New York. As the 80-horsepower Curtiss Jenny gained alti-
      tude, he discovered life in the slipstream was not as fine as he had imag-
       ined. "I had no idea the air could be so rough and unpleasant," he
recalled in his autobiography. Goddard spent most of the flight just
holding on, hoping he would not be pitched out of the plane.
   In the early 1920s, Goddard began to build an impressive record in
reconnaissance work, photographing a bombing test on captured Ger-
     man ships, surveying the Tennessee River basin, and taking pictures of
archaeological sites near St. Louis. Dissatisfied with the available recon-
              naissance cameras, he worked with Eastman Kodak in Rochester to pro-
      duce lenses with long focal lengths. He took the first nighttime aerial
photo in November 1925 by dropping a flash powder bomb over
Rochester and shooting pictures by the artificial light it created. In
1934, he accompanied Arnold on a photographic mapping mission over
Alaska.
  With tensions mounting in Europe in 1936, Goddard, sensing a po-
      tential demand for reconnaissance flights at higher altitudes where they
could escape antiaircraft fire, revived his earlier effort to develop a 36-
inch telephoto lens that would take clear pictures of distant objects. His
thinking at the time was a preview of Leghorn's later ideas. "If you could
fly high enough to be out of range of the enemy's antiaircraft fire and at
the same time get photographs that were as clear and detailed as those
taken at lower altitudes, you'd have a built-in safety factor," he recalled.
   Early in 1939, Arnold summoned Goddard to Washington for con-
            sultations. Both men knew war was likely in Europe and that America
might become involved. Goddard made a bold proposal: build a special
high-performance reconnaissance aircraft. "It must be fast, it must fly
high, it must have long range and it must have defensive armament," he
told Arnold. The idea was prescient, but Arnold could not afford to de-
     vote resources to a plane that would not add to American offensive fire-
power.
    The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                             43

  In 1940, during a visit to Eastman Kodak in Rochester, Goddard met
Richard Leghorn, who had recently started doing research and develop-
      ment work at the company. Goddard had come to Kodak to talk with
the company's top research executive, Kenneth Mees. With Europe at
war, Goddard knew he could no longer count on buying high-quality
lenses from Germany. Figuring that the United States might get drawn
into the war, he anticipated an urgent demand for long-focal-length
lenses that were small and light enough to be used in aerial reconnais-
       sance cameras. His conversation with Mees that December day played a
pivotal role in shaping the future of American reconnaissance. Mees
told Goddard the answer to his lens problem was James G. Baker, a
young astronomer and lens designer at Harvard whom he had hoped to
recruit to work at Kodak. He urged Goddard to travel to Cambridge to
meet Baker. Mees also suggested that Goddard get together with one of
Kodak's newest researchers, Dick Leghorn.
   Leghorn was from the Boston area. His father, George, was an auto
distributor; his mother, Agnes, a housewife. Leghorn, a compact, dash-
    ing man with dark hair and a thin mustache, was born on February 7,
1919, in Brookline, just west of Boston, and went to high school in
nearby Winchester. He graduated from MIT in 1939 with a degree in
physics and a keen interest in photography.
   Not long after moving to Rochester to work at Kodak in the summer
of 1939, he developed a passion for flying, rising many mornings at 4
a.m. to learn to fly a Waco biplane at Rochester Airport. "I've been a
risk- taker," Leghorn said. "Once I learned how to fly, I'd take girlfriends
up to show off by doing loops and rolls."
   For Leghorn, who yearned to be an airman and had been commis-
        sioned as a reserve officer during his undergraduate years at MIT, the
introduction to Goddard was perfectly timed. Goddard could transfer
Leghorn's commission from the Ordnance Corps to the Army's air
command, putting him on the career path he wanted. By March 1941,
Leghorn was on his way to Dayton.
  When Goddard got to Cambridge in January 1941, he met Baker on
a snowy day at the Harvard Observatory. Baker, who was from
Louisville, had come to Harvard as a graduate student in 1935. In Cam-
                      44       Secret     Empire


bridge he turned his attention to the design of new long-focal-length
lenses that would allow astronomers to peer deeper into space. When
Goddard entered Baker's cluttered attic workshop and spotted a young
man dressed in coveralls, he at first mistook the astronomer for a gradu-
    ate student. As soon as he examined some of Baker's designs, he knew
Mees had done him a great favor. "I could see that there was an original-
   ity to his ideas that was not bound to old concepts," Goddard recalled.
  He told Baker that the Army needed novel camera systems with
lenses that would not go out of focus at high altitudes, where tempera-
      ture and air pressure changes made a lens contract and expand. The
problem was especially acute in the large glass elements used in long-
focal-length cameras. Goddard wanted a 40-inch optical system that
would remain in focus by automatically correcting for the changes — a
leap in design that no one in the field had even tried to make. Baker, as
Goddard remembered, "didn't bat an eye." Goddard, who by this time
was receiving plenty of financial support from Washington, offered
Baker $25,000 for the project, an uncommonly high fee for a research
project in those days. After gaining the assent of Dr. Harlow Shapley,
the director of the Harvard Observatory, Baker agreed to set up and di-
     rect an optical lab for the Army at the university.
   Baker said he would need the help of a shutter specialist to produce
the new camera system Goddard had in mind. Fortuitously, several
months earlier, Goddard had recruited Amrom H. Katz, a precocious
physicist who was working at the Census Bureau. Katz had rattled the
camera world by showing that the shutter speeds on all cameras made in
the United States were miscalculated because of flaws in the calibration
devices used in manufacturing. Katz, a cheerful, cherubic dynamo, went
to work with Baker, a laconic, taciturn scientist, in an incongruous but
productive collaboration that, with the help of other equally talented
experts, yielded ever more advanced reconnaissance cameras over the
next three decades.
  By the late 1940s, Goddard, working with the Boston University lab,
had come up with a 48-inch lens. Pictures taken by the camera as it
passed over a golf course in Fort Worth, Texas, at 34,000 feet clearly
showed two oversized golf balls on one of the putting greens. It was a
    The    Origins      of Strategic          Intelligence               45


photographic feat, even though the balls were three inches in diameter.
But Goddard wanted even higher resolution pictures, aiming for a 240-
inch system that could distinguish individual aircraft on the ground
from a range of 100 miles. The potential uses for such a camera were not
obvious to most photoreconnaissance specialists, for space flight still
seemed a distant possibility.
   Many of the men who worked for Goddard at the Dayton lab in the
early 1 940s were reunited after the war in the Marshall Islands for the
atomic tests, including Leghorn, Katz, and Walter Levison, another
bright photographic engineer. Duncan E. MacDonald, who had served
as Baker's assistant at the Harvard optical lab, also reported to Kwajalein
Atoll to work with the group. During the long, tropical evenings at
Kwajalein, Leghorn tested out his reconnaissance ideas with these men
in conversations at the officers club.
  The group gathered again a few months later at the dedication of the
Boston University lab. The most creative minds in aerial reconnais-
      sance were there: Goddard, Leghorn, Baker, Katz, Levison, and Mac-
Donald. The audience also included a roster of top Army Air Forces
officers, including Lt. Gen. Curtis LeMay, and executives from many of
the nation's top photographic companies, including Eastman Kodak,
Fairchild Camera, Chicago Aerial, Bausch & Lomb, and Perkin-Elmer.
Few of the people who listened to Dick Leghorn spell out his ideas for
peacetime reconnaissance that afternoon could have imagined how
prophetic his words would be. Fewer still could have realized that many
members of the audience would help make his ideas a reality.
   Dick Leghorn's vision of an invulnerable, high-flying reconnaissance
airplane was brilliant. The only problem was that nothing remotely like
it existed in 1946. The jet age was just dawning and the space age still
seemed the stuff of science fiction. The idea of operating an airplane
70,000 feet above the earth looked technologically improbable, if not
impossible. An entirely new kind of plane would have to be designed
and built that could cruise safely in the thin atmosphere, radical changes
in fuel chemistry would be needed to keep the jet fuel from boiling off in
the extremely low air pressure, and crew members would require pres-
        surized flight suits to keep their blood from vaporizing. By the aeronau-
                          46        Secret      Empire


tical engineering standards of 1946, Leghorn might as well have been
hallucinating.
   As American and British leaders began to realize that they faced an
ominous new military threat from the Soviet Union, the spy hardware at
their disposal was anything but invulnerable. If they wanted to peer into
the Soviet Union, they would have to use conventional military aircraft
with all the dangers that entailed, including the possibility that planes
would be shot down, airmen might be captured or killed, and even the
chance that the Kremlin would seize on the violation of its airspace to
initiate a war. Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower, and a series of
British prime ministers, including Winston Churchill, reluctantly de-
        cided they had to take that risk. To minimize the prospect that spy
flights might provoke an explosive conflict, they cloaked them in such
great secrecy that the real purpose of the missions remained unknown
to the public — and even the families of the men who flew them — for
more than four decades.
   The first spy flights began in late 1946 along the coast of northeast
Siberia, across the Bering Strait from Alaska. They quickly drew
protests from Moscow. The Peacetime Airborne Reconnaissance Pro-
       gram, as the campaign was called, aimed at collecting photographic and
electronic intelligence without entering forbidden foreign airspace. A
good deal of intelligence about Soviet air defenses, including radar and
communications systems, could be gathered by reconnaissance planes
flying along or near the Soviet frontier. Electronic sensors installed in
modified bombers and other warplanes identified Soviet radar sites and
analyzed their signals as Soviet defenders scanned the skies, giving war
planners in Washington some idea of the resistance American planes
would encounter in an attack. Oblique-angle photographs taken from
off the Soviet coast provided limited but useful information about air
bases and other military sites on the fringe of Soviet territory. Flights
like Hal Austin's, which deliberately crossed deep into Soviet territory,
began in the early 1950s.
   As the secrecy has lifted in recent years, the full dimensions of the re-
               connaissance campaign have become clear. It was one of the most daring
and dangerous elements of the cold war, and the only one that involved
    The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                                47


frequent military clashes between Soviet and American forces. The
costs linger, including grieving families that still do not know if long-
missing husbands, fathers, and brothers were killed when their planes
were attacked or if the men were captured and lived for years in Soviet
captivity. The history of the spy flights is filled with heroism and patri-
        otism, bonds of fellowship that endure to this day, and achievements for
which an unknowing nation never gave proper thanks. Hundreds of
men in the Air Force and Navy risked their lives flying along or across
the Soviet frontier in an effort to learn about Russian air defenses and
military forces.
   Sadly, there is also no exact accounting of what happened to the men
who never made it back to base. At least 252 air crewmen were shot
down on spy flights between 1950 and 1970, most directed against the
Soviet Union. (China was also a target, as were some Soviet bloc na-
       tions.) Itis certain that 90 of these men survived, for they were either
rescued by American forces or their capture by the Soviet Union or an-
       other country was confirmed. But the fate of 1 38 men is unknown. It is
possible, even likely, that some of them survived for years in captivity,
while Washington made little effort to determine if they were alive and
to make arrangements for their repatriation.
   But the secrecy afforded little comfort to the presidents and prime
ministers who sent their countrymen into harm's way. As the need for
intelligence increased, flights became more frequent and more haz-
         ardous. Every time a plane was intercepted or attacked by Soviet forces,
inevitably producing a rash of embarrassing headlines and misleading
statements by American officials about the purpose of the flights, pres-
     sure mounted in Washington to come up with a safer way to do aerial re-
                   connaissance. This dynamic became one of the great engines of
invention in the cold war. "We knew Americans were dying on these
missions," Leghorn recalled. "It created a real sense of urgency to come
up with new aircraft and to think about moving into space."
   For years research and design work for a new reconnaissance plane
was halting and poorly coordinated, the neglected stepchild of a military
establishment wedded to traditional combat aircraft and unwilling to
invest in new reconnaissance technologies. But Leghorn and other vi-
                          48        Secret      Empire


sionary men kept pushing, and as the Soviet threat intensified and the
toll of lost airmen rose, they gained powerful allies in the Pentagon and
the White House, as well as in science and industry.
   After leaving military service in September 1946, Leghorn had re-
        turned to work for Kodak and was sent to London in 1947 to manage
distribution operations in Europe. He returned to Kodak headquarters
in Rochester in late 1948 and quickly resumed proselytizing for high-
altitude reconnaissance flights. His former commander, Brig. Gen. Paul
T. Cullen, invited Leghorn to address a reconnaissance symposium in
December at Topeka Air Force Base in Kansas (later renamed Forbes
AFB). Without missing a beat, Leghorn picked up where he had left off
in Boston two years earlier, emphasizing the urgent need to fly unde-
              tectable intelligence missions over the Soviet Union. He told the audi-
     ence of Air Force officers that he believed the United States already had
the planes, cameras, and camouflage techniques to do the job, and pre-
        dicted itwould not be long before stealth aircraft could be developed
that would flummox Soviet radar.
  The Korean War gave Leghorn the chance to carry his crusade di-
     rectly to the high command of the Air Force. As a reservist, he was re-
         called to active duty in April 1951 and given command of the
Reconnaissance Systems Branch of the Wright Air Development Cen-
    ter back in Dayton. The center was the Air Force's primary internal
source of ideas for new aircraft or the reconfiguration of old airplanes
for new missions, and Leghorn's department was responsible for com-
    ing up with spy planes.
  Leghorn quickly prepared a five-page memo outlining his ideas on
how the Air Force should tackle reconnaissance demands in the coming
decade. To collect intelligence on Soviet forces in peacetime, he said in
the July 195 1 paper, reconnaissance aircraft would need to minimize the
risk of detection and interception. Leghorn then discussed half a dozen
reconnaissance vehicles, including satellites — which he thought were
too far-fetched at the time to warrant much attention — and balloons,
which he favored. He also recommended the use of guided missiles and
unmanned aircraft and once again underlined the need to develop high-
altitude manned planes.
    The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                              49


   Impatient with the pace of Air Force research work, which had suf-
       fered from lack of attention and money after the retirement of Hap
Arnold in March 1946, Leghorn soon proposed grabbing the best plane
available and modifying it for reconnaissance duty. He wanted to build
an aircraft that could cruise above 45,000 feet, higher than the opera-
       tional limit of the Soviet Union's most advanced fighter planes, and fly
fast enough to outrun Russian planes and travel over the Soviet interior
without running out of fuel. "It was the first real attempt to get a spe-
        cialized plane for overflights of the Soviet Union," recalled Harold F.
"Bud" Wienberg, a Leghorn colleague at Wright Field and later at the
Pentagon.
   The available answer was the Canberra, a new British twin-engine jet
bomber. Its performance specs were ideal: a service ceiling of 48,000
feet, a maximum speed of 540 mph, and a range of about 3,600 miles.
The new bomber, built by the British Electric Company, made its
maiden flight in May 1949, and a reconnaissance model, the Canberra
PR3, made its debut in March 1950.
  Leghorn figured that by extending the wings, adding more powerful
Rolls-Royce Avon- 109 engines, eliminating one of the two pilots, and
dumping the armor plating and other combat hardware that weighed
down the plane, a Canberra would be able to cruise at 63 ,000 feet with a
full load of fuel and ascend to 67,000 feet as the fuel burned off during
flight. British Electric would produce the customized reconnaissance
model.

  "We felt as if we were pioneering in aviation," Wienberg said.
  If not the plane of Leghorn's dreams, this was certainly a vast im-
            provement over the aircraft Washington was using for spy flights.
Leghorn wanted to order twelve of the modified Canberras and pro-
      posed setting up a special reconnaissance unit to fly them. He worked
closely with the Royal Air Force liaison officer at Wright Field, bypass-
    ing the usual bureaucratic channels and paperwork. He sold the idea to
his commanders, who submitted it to the Pentagon for approval and
funding. But it was blocked by the Air Research and Development
Command which, in a spasm of conventional thinking, ruled that the
plane must meet combat specifications, including a heavier airframe.
                        50        Secret     Empire


  Leghorn also ran into resistance when he presented his plan to Gen-
    eral LeMay. "He was dismissive," Leghorn said. The SAC commander
wanted nothing to do with a special reconnaissance unit that operated
outside his control, nor did he see the need for such a specialized air-
      craft. That was especially ironic, since Leghorn was proposing to use
the plane in part to photograph Soviet military bases that LeMay and
his bombers might someday be called upon to attack.
   While Leghorn was wrestling unsuccessfully with the Air Force in
1951, Washington was preparing for the riskiest reconnaissance flights
yet — missions deep into Soviet airspace. Peripheral operations gave
Washington little intelligence about forces based farther inland, let
alone in the Russian heartland, where most of the Soviet Union's mili-
     tary and industrial power was located. The pressure to venture deeper
into Soviet airspace increased with the advent of the Korean War in
June 1950. With many records still classified, it is difficult to know with
certainty when the first American plane was ordered to do so. R. Cargill
Hall, who did extensive research on the subject when he served as an Air
Force historian, found that Truman first approved deep overflights in
December 1950, not long after Chinese troops entered the Korean
War. Truman acted on the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
who feared that Russian long-range TU-4 bombers equipped with nu-
      clear weapons were being assigned to bases on the Chukotskiy Penin-
     sula, just across the Bering Strait from Alaska. From there, the bombers
could reach Seattle.
  The Korean War, though limited to the Far East, heightened fears in
Washington that Moscow was preparing to attack Western Europe.
The Air Force feared that if the order came to bomb Soviet targets,
American pilots would practically be flying blind, uncertain about the
precise location of military and industrial targets and dangerously un-
       aware ofinterior air defenses. That would be especially true for night or
bad weather flights, when navigators could not rely on visual sightings
and would need to guide their aircraft to targets by radar. Unless they
knew just what terrain and physical features they had to track on radar,
and could recognize specific targets on their radar screens, the naviga-
     The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                                    51


tors would have difficulty directing accurate bombing runs. The only
answer was to send planes over the western regions of the Soviet Union
to record radar images that could be used later if hostilities commenced.
Because radar reconnaissance did not require light, the missions could
be flown at night, when it would be harder for Soviet forces to spot the
aircraft.
   The pace of reconnaissance work picked up through 1952, despite
the loss of two American aircraft to Soviet attack in the Far East, the first
on June 13 over the Sea of Japan, the second on October 7 over the Pa-
      cific Ocean north of Japan. Both flights were coastal intelligence-
gathering missions. A total of nineteen American airmen were aboard
the two planes. All were presumed to have died, but only one body was
recovered. Before the year was out, American spy planes were swarming
along the Soviet Pacific and Baltic coasts.
   By this time, Leghorn had moved to Washington, where he had at
last found an Air Force patron who appreciated his concept for a thor-
                  oughbred spy plane and knew how to overcome the institutional resis-
        tance to it. His new ally and boss was Col. Bernard Schriever, an
assistant to the Air Force deputy chief of staff for development. "Benny
had big balls," recalled Bud Wienberg. "He may have been a colonel,
but he didn't act like one. Even when he was a lieutenant, he behaved
like a general. I saw him tell generals what to do. He was a real visionary.
He knew we needed new ideas."
   Schriever had heard about Leghorn's Canberra proposal and other
fresh ideas and was looking for an imaginative officer who could help
plan for the Air Force's future reconnaissance needs. In the six months
that Leghorn and Schriever worked together in the Air Force planning
office — from August 1952 to January 1953 — they gave the Pentagon a
jolt of fresh thinking about reconnaissance techniques. As conventional
American spy planes were being shot out of the sky by the Soviet Union,
the two men pushed tirelessly for the development of less vulnerable
intelligence-gathering systems.
   Schriever was no ordinary Air Force officer. He had a master's degree
in aeronautical engineering from Stanford and was a protege of Hap
                       52       Secret     Empire


Arnold. "I had the good fortune of serving under Hap Arnold when I
was a reserve officer just out of flying school in the early thirties at
Wright Field, and I got to know him quite well there," Schriever said.
   Schriever had emigrated to the United States from Germany in 1917
at age seven with his mother to be reunited with his father, an engineer
for a German steamship company. Schriever's father had been ma-
        rooned inNew York on April 6, 1917, when the United States declared
war on Germany and his ship was impounded. The family settled in
Texas, where Schriever developed an affinity for flying after watching
biplanes taking off and landing at Army airfields outside San Antonio. In
1932, when he was twenty-two, he entered the Army Air Corps flying
school at Kelly Field in Texas.
   The tall, trim pilot, whose passion for aviation was exceeded only by
his love of golf, met Arnold soon after graduating from flying school.
He learned from Arnold the importance of using new technologies to
bolster American airpower and the advantages of working closely with
outside scientists and engineers. Through Arnold, Schriever met
Theodore von Karman at Caltech, Arnold's chief link to the scientific
community. Schriever was impressed by Arnold's interest in von
Karman's experiments with jet propulsion and rocket motors, and could
see that the scientist offered the Army Air Forces a chance to break free
of conventional thinking about its research and development projects.
In 1944, while Schriever was based in the Far East, Arnold enlisted von
Karman to direct a panel of scientific advisers to look ahead to a new
generation of airplanes and weapons. Arnold stressed the critical value
of new technologies when he addressed the first meeting of the Scien-
     tific Advisory Group at the Pentagon on January 9, 1945: "I have
worked with von Karman the last twenty years, and I was sometimes
scared by the knowledge he had that we weren't using. ... I don't want
ever again to have the United States caught the way we were this time."
   When the war ended, Schriever, by then a colonel, asked to be as-
        signed to the Pentagon, in part to work with Arnold, who was nearing
retirement. Schriever's job title was a mouthful — chief of the scientific
liaison branch in the office of the deputy chief of staff for materiel — but
his duties were a perfect fit. He was the main contact point between the
    The    Origins      of Strategic        Intelligence               53


Army Air Forces and von Karman, whose panel was reconstituted after
the war and renamed as the Scientific Advisory Board. Schriever took
full advantage of the role to befriend a host of scientists and engineers,
some of whom were later instrumental in the development of missiles
and satellites. He discovered for himself just how helpful it was to get
advice from independent experts whose judgment was not warped by
political or financial turf battles in the Pentagon.
   Unfortunately for the nation, Arnold's immediate successors did not
share his enthusiasm for scientific advice, and von Karman 's board of
consultants temporarily receded in influence as the Defense Depart-
      ment was reorganized and the U.S. Air Force was created, in 1947, as a
separate service. Demobilization and the nation's understandable desire
to turn inward after the war left all the military services scrambling to
stay in fighting shape as they competed for dwindling resources. The
postwar environment did not encourage investments in untested new
military technologies, especially in specialized fields like aerial recon-
           naissance. American airmen paid the price for this inertia when they
were dispatched on spying missions in lumbering piston-engine planes
that all but invited Soviet attack.
   Schriever and Leghorn were determined to change that, and were in
a position to exercise considerable influence. Schriever, by the summer
of 1952, had left his scientific liaison job to become one of the Air
Force's top planners. Part of his job was to imagine the Air Force of the
future and the weapons it would need to defend the nation. He had a
small staff and encouraged his aides to think creatively. He gave
Leghorn responsibility for exploring future intelligence and reconnais-
      sance needs and instructed him to prepare a blueprint — known in Air
Force lingo as "development planning objectives" — for the decade
ahead. Leghorn was assisted by two men who were also fervent believers
in high-altitude photoreconnaissance, Bud Wienberg and Eugene P.
Kiefer, both of whom had worked with him at Wright Field.
  "We knew American reconnaissance planes were going down,"
Wienberg said. "That spurred us to work faster to produce a new air-
craft."
  The Washington arrangement was improvised. Leghorn had worked
                            54         Secret       Empire


back channels at the Pentagon to sell his approach to Schriever, includ-
    ing the core idea that Schriever should add intelligence and reconnais-
         sance to his planning office. Schriever, in turn, had gotten Leghorn,
Wienberg, and Kiefer assigned to Washington on temporary duty
rather than transferring them to Washington permanently. Every week
or so the temporary assignment expired, cutting off the government's
modest subsidy for living away from home. "It was crazy," Wienberg
said. "We had to keep going back to Wright Field to get our orders recut
so we could collect our $10 per diem for expenses in Washington."
   The men worked in cramped offices without administrative support.
Leghorn complained bitterly to Schriever about the conditions. "Pres-
    ent circumstances are so trying that it is difficult to believe that the Air
Staff is really serious about this activity," he said in a letter. "In any event
I am certain that under present working conditions it is impossible to
prepare a development planning objective by the end of the year."
   Thanks to Leghorn's and Schriever's outside connections, Leghorn
and his associates could call on a group of distinguished consultants for
advice, including Edwin Land from Polaroid; James Baker, the Harvard
astronomer and lens designer; Edward Purcell, a Harvard physicist and
Nobel laureate; and Allen F. Donovan from the Cornell Aeronautical
Laboratory.

  A year before Leghorn's arrival in Washington, Schriever, partly at
Leghorn's urging, had contracted with MIT to add intelligence and re-
                    connaissance problems to "Project Lincoln," a highly classified study of
American air defenses that the institute had previously agreed to con-
     duct for the Air Force. Beginning in January 1952, the fifteen members
of the reconnaissance study group, drawn from the academic and busi-
     ness worlds, made an intensive examination of Air Force reconnaissance
programs. Leghorn, still at Dayton at the time, was assigned to be the li-
      aison officer to the study from Wright Field. Land, Purcell, and Baker
were among the panel members who traveled to air bases around the na-
     tion and heard from dozens of Air Force officers and academic experts,
including Schriever and Leghorn. The group set up shop above a secre-
      tarial school located in Beacon Hill in Boston and became known as the
Beacon Hill Study Group.
     The Origins of Strategic Intelligence                                  55


   Their report, summarized for the Air Force in April and formally
submitted in June, just before Leghorn moved to Washington, gave new
energy to the search for high-performance spy planes and other inven-
     tive methods of peeking into the Soviet Union. Using language that
Leghorn might have drafted himself, the panel said, "We have reached a
period in history when our peacetime knowledge of the capabilities, ac-
       tivities and dispositions of a potentially hostile nation is such to demand
that we supplement it with the maximum amount of information ob-
        tainable through aerial reconnaissance. To avoid political involvement,
such aerial reconnaissance must be conducted either from vehicles fly-
    ing in friendly airspace, or — a decision on this point permitting — from
vehicles whose performance is such that they can operate in Soviet air-
      space with greatly reduced chances of detection and interception."
   The study group presented all sorts of other creative ideas for consid-
            eration, including strapping cameras to rockets that would climb 200
miles into space before tumbling back to earth. Jim Baker calculated
that at that altitude, just beyond the borders of the Soviet Union, a cam-
    era with a long focal length could look out across 1 ,000 miles of Soviet
territory, showing airfields, towns, rivers, crops, and forests. For
Leghorn, however, the key section of the report dealt with his dream
airplane. Chapter 11, which covered reconnaissance vehicles, talked
about "a turbojet-powered, photographic, manned aircraft, in which al-
       titude issought at the expense of all other performance parameters."
The report said such an aircraft could be operational within a few years
if an existing plane were modified, pointedly noting that the Canberra
might be a good candidate. Almost eight years had passed since
Leghorn's epiphany about strategic reconnaissance at Bikini Atoll and
his appeal at Boston University for creation of a virtually invisible and
invulnerable spy plane. Now he had the endorsement of a group of re-
        spected scientists and industrialists in a report that was sure to be widely
read among top officials not only in the Air Force but in the Defense
Department and the White House as well.
  Leghorn spent the remainder of 1952 in Washington working on his
reconnaissance blueprint for Schriever. He selected specialized over-
     head reconnaissance as one of the top five objectives and noted the ben-
                        56        Secret      Empire


efits of high-altitude flights: "Discovery and identification of targets,
appraisal of enemy military strengths, confirmation of crucial intelli-
        gence, including atomic, radar and terrain charts." He noted the inher-
     ent advantages of aerial spying: "Timeliness, geographic coverage,
accepted accuracy." To compare the different spy machines he sketched
a chart showing, in ascending operational altitude, conventional air-
       craft, a modified Canberra, balloons, what he labeled as "all new
manned light turbojet aircraft," and, at the top of the paper, a satellite.
The simple drawing showed how far each could penetrate into Soviet
airspace. The turbojet airplane had the dual advantages of flying above
70,000 feet and traveling 1,500 miles over Soviet territory.
   Before leaving Washington in January 1953, just before Dwight
Eisenhower's inauguration as president, Leghorn advised Schriever one
last time to push the development of a lightweight, single-engine air-
       plane that could be used for close-up views of specific military and in-
             dustrial sites. His work for Schriever done, Leghorn once again left
active duty to return to Kodak. He did not know it, but he had set in mo-
      tion a sequence of events that would lead in less than two years to a crash
program to build the U-2 .
                         CHAPTER           THREE




       Stargazing in Santa Monica

Mert        Davies didn't need to read about American spy planes com-
           ing under attack to be frustrated by the government's glacial
progress in coming up with new methods of peering behind the Iron
Curtain. His complaint had nothing to do with the failure to build Dick
Leghorn's high-flying aircraft. Davies's ambition was to get America
into space. He was a believer in rockets and satellites. Along with like-
minded colleagues at the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, Davies
had been pushing for the development of satellites since the mid- 1940s.
They had made few converts in Washington — even freethinkers like
Leghorn and Schriever were dubious about satellites in the near-term.
But the RAND staff wouldn't give up, churning out report after report
that described the feasibility of using satellites for everything from re-
              con ais ance toweather forecasting to communications. Their dreams
weren't realized until 1960, but their early work was pioneering and
prescient, and without it the United States might have come much later
to the day when it could look down safely at Soviet airfields and factories
from more than 100 miles in space.
   RAND was not a typical research operation, in attitude or geography.
Like Southern California itself, it grew out of the influx of people and
industry to the benign climate and open spaces of the West Coast.
RAND was a creature of the aviation community that gravitated to
Southern California during and after the war, drawn in part by the tech-
         nological advances generated by the Guggenheim Aeronautical Lab and
the Jet Propulsion Lab at Caltech and Hap Arnold's faith in the scien-
     tists working under Theodore von Karman. RAND was born in Octo-

                                      57
                         58        Secret      Empire


ber 1 945 as an Army Air Forces research and engineering shop at the
Douglas Aircraft Company, the brainchild of General Arnold and other
men who believed that in the postwar years the Air Forces needed to
continue to tap into the thinking of civilian scientists and engineers to
come up with new weapons systems. (The name was an acronym for Re-
      search ANd Development.) In the waning months of the war, Arnold
told Secretary of War Henry Stimson, "During this war the Army,
Army Air Forces and the Navy have made unprecedented use of scien-
     tific and industrial resources. The conclusion is inescapable that we
have not yet established the balance necessary to insure the continuance
of teamwork among the military, other government agencies, industry
and the universities. Scientific planning must be years in advance of the
actual research and development work."
   Dwight Eisenhower shared the sentiment, though he was not directly
involved in the creation of RAND. Appearing before the House Appro-
          priations Committee in June 1946, when he was the army chief of staff,
General Eisenhower said, "I cannot over emphasize the necessity for
the maintenance of well-rounded and vigorous research and develop-
      ment programs. ... In the fields of guided missiles, electronic devices
and high-speed, high-performance aircraft, the possibilities are unlim-
     ited. Itwould be fatal to permit ourselves to be outdistanced."
  From the start, RAND was an organization that encouraged un-
                orthodox thinking on long-term issues, free from the constraints of
Pentagon bureaucrats. Staff members like Davies were given great free-
      dom and encouraged to consider novel solutions to traditional military
problems, like the collection of intelligence information on enemy
forces. The paperwork, turf wars, and cautious climate that stifled cre-
        ativity at the Pentagon were largely absent at RAND. Its first separate
home, a two-story building at the corner of Broadway and Fourth Street
in Santa Monica, which the staff occupied in May 1947, was just blocks
from the beach. On weekends, Davies and other employees would head
for the broad swath of sand on either side of the Santa Monica Pier for
sunbathing and volleyball.
   Davies and his friends at RAND loved the beach. Indeed, the combi-
        nation of ocean, sun, and mild temperatures had lured him to Santa
              Stargazing         in Santa      Monica             59


Monica in 1940 after the Army ended his flying career on the grounds
that he was too tall to fit into an enclosed cockpit. The air service hadn't
blinked when the 6-foot- 7 -inch flier volunteered for duty, but after he
graduated from open to closed cockpits and started to leave his para-
       chute behind in the hangar so he could squeeze into the cramped pilot's
seat, he was washed out of the military.
   Davies had honed his flying skills as a teenager. He was born in St.
Paul, Minnesota, in 1917, but moved with his parents to California two
years later. They settled in Palo Alto. Davies was soon spending his free
time at the town's small airport by the bay and earned his pilot's license
before graduating from high school and enrolling at Stanford. His uncle
had been a pilot in World War I, and Davies, whose interests were al-
       ready turning toward the heavens, was captivated by the idea of soaring
into the sky and doing daredevil stunts. After graduating from Stanford
in 1938 with a degree in mathematics, Davies moved to Reno to teach at
the University of Nevada campus. He spent much of his free time flying
out of the local airfield in Truckee Meadows, the high valley below the
Sierra Nevada mountains, doing aerial maneuvers to test his skills and
his nerve. "I enjoyed things like power stalls," he recalled. "You know,
you go up and try to keep control of the plane as it stalls. It's kid's play."
He laughed heartily at the memory.
   While at Stanford, Davies had stumbled onto a book about space that
stirred his imagination. Rockets Through Space by P. E. Cleator, a British
scientist, described the solar system and talked about the idea of inter-
          planetary exploration and man-made satellites circling the earth. "I still
have that book at home," Davies said in 1998. "It was one of the first
things that really made me think about space." Davies soon joined the
American Rocket Society, which was founded in 1930, and the British
Interplanetary Society, another early hotbed of ideas about exploring
distant galaxies. He collected articles and books about space, including
Rockets in Planetary Space by Hermann Oberth, the father of German
rocket science. Oberth 's 1923 book — rejected as outlandish by Heidel-
      berg University a year earlier when he submitted it as his Ph.D. disser-
      tation— described a liquid-propellant rocket that could fly fast enough
to escape the earth's gravity. Oberth also endorsed the concept of an ar-
                        60       Secret     Empire


tificial satellite that could be placed in orbit around the earth. His theo-
      ries and experimental work provided the foundation for later Nazi ef-
     forts to develop rocket weapons, including the V-2. Oberth himself
worked on the project at Peenemunde during the war under Wernher
von Braun, who had previously been his assistant. After the war, von
Braun moved to the United States, where he became one of America's
top rocket scientists.
   Davies also studied the work of Robert H. Goddard, America's fore-
      most rocket scientist at the time. Goddard, who grew up in Worcester,
Massachusetts, read War of the Worlds, the H. G. Wells science fiction
thriller, in 1898, when it was serialized in the newspapers, and was in-
        spired to try to build a working spacecraft. Goddard's experimental
breakthroughs — among them the first rocket motor that used liquid
fuels and the first flight of a liquid-propelled rocket in March 1926 at his
aunt's Massachusetts farm — essentially launched America toward space.
While at Stanford, Davies read Goddard's groundbreaking 1919 Smith-
         sonian monograph, A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes. "The possi-
      bility of getting to the planets caught my attention," he said. "There
were worlds out there, and we knew so little about them."
   Davies was a good deal more enthusiastic about Goddard's work than
the New York Times. The paper's editorial page briefly noted on January
18, 1920, that Goddard's idea of sending a missile into space seemed
practical and promising, but it patronizingly dismissed the thought that
men might eventually travel to the moon.
  Despite all the flying stunts, Reno, Nevada, bored Davies, and he re-
        turned to Stanford after a year to begin graduate studies in math. Ten-
     sions were rising in Europe. He signed up for an Army flight training
program on campus, expecting he would get a chance to fly combat mis-
      sions ifwar erupted and the United States joined the fight. When the
height limitations grounded Davies, he opted for the next best thing —
building planes. He had heard of Douglas and knew the company had a
plant in Santa Monica, hard by the Pacific. That was enough for him. "I
wanted to be near the beach," he said. He packed up his belongings in a
1941 Buick convertible and headed for Southern California. "I thought
if I could work at Douglas and walk to the beach, I'd have it made." He
              Stargazing         in Santa      Moniga             61


later learned that all the other pilots in the Stanford training program
were dispatched to the Pacific after Pearl Harbor and died in combat.
   Davies was put to work building planes for the Navy at the Douglas
plant in nearby El Segundo, where he spent the war years. He enrolled
in advanced math classes that the company offered with the help of gov-
          ernment subsidies and got to know other employees like him who were
drawn to complex theoretical problems. Like Davies, many of them as-
         pired to work for RAND after the Army Air Forces paid Douglas to cre-
    ate the elite research shop after the war. When Davies learned in 1946
that RAND was doing a crash study about satellites for the Army Air
Forces, he requested a transfer. General LeMay, then the director of re-
        search and development for the Air Forces, had ordered up the study
from RAND when he learned that the Navy had asked other companies
to examine the feasibility of developing satellites. Davies moved to
RAND       early in 1947, not long after the completion of a second exami-
        nation ofsatellites, this one focused on potential reconnaissance uses.
  The May 1946 satellite engineering feasibility study, completed in
just three weeks, looks by today's standards like something from a Buck
Rogers novel. The title itself is a throwback to another age: Preliminary
Design of an Experimental World-Circling Spaceship. The cover page
shows a bullet-shaped rocket streaking into space above the earth. An il-
           lustration ofthe multistage rocket on the launch pad shows a rounded,
streamlined vehicle that tapers to a point at the top, a sort of art deco
rocket design. But by the technological yardstick of 1946, when the re-
       port was submitted to the Air Forces, it was a remarkably bold and vi-
              sionary document. It said that with minimal advances in rocket engine
and other technologies, which should be attainable in short order, a
small satellite weighing no more than 2,000 pounds could be placed in
orbit.
   Though the RAND experts conceived of a satellite as a multiuse
spacecraft that might even be manned someday, they saw initial systems
as unmanned devices, in part because of the difficulty of sustaining life
in space and returning a satellite and its human cargo safely back to
earth. They clearly recognized the potential for scientific and military
applications and anticipated the political implications of being the first
                          62         Secret      Empire


nation to place a satellite in orbit. The RAND report said, "The
achievement of a satellite craft by the United States would inflame the
imagination of mankind and would probably produce repercussions in
the world comparable to the explosion of the atomic bomb."
   Louis N. Ridenour of the University of Pennsylvania's Nuclear
Physics and Electronics Department, who was hired as a consultant by
RAND to work on the report, wrote a chapter on the potential uses of a
satellite. Ridenour, a radar expert, was virtually clairvoyant. He imag-
      ined that satellites could be used to guide missiles to their targets and ac-
               curately predicted that the development of intercontinental missiles and
satellites would dovetail to some extent. Ridenour described how satel-
     lites could be used to monitor weather conditions and improve forecast-
      ing, and suggested how an orbiting spacecraft could instantly relay
communications from continent to continent. Perhaps Ridenour's most
perspicacious prediction was that satellites could serve as reconnais-
      sance platforms. "It should also be remarked that the satellite offers an
observation aircraft which cannot be brought down by an enemy who
has not mastered similar techniques."
   LeMay and his Air Forces staff were intrigued by the report and anx-
     ious to ensure that their service, rather than the Navy, gain control of
space operations. Shortly after the RAND report was delivered, LeMay
and Douglas executives agreed that the researchers should immediately
begin work on the next step, which was preparation of a detailed design
study for a reconnaissance satellite that could serve as the basis for con-
         tracting with companies to begin planning actual components. James E.
Lipp, who headed RAND's missile division, oversaw the work, which
was directed by Robert Salter. The missile group consisted of about
twenty people who worked in spare quarters on the second floor of the
RAND building in Santa Monica.
   Early in 1947, as the cold war began to intensify in a divided Europe
and American spy planes were operating along the Soviet frontier,
RAND delivered a series of papers that looked more closely at some of
the questions outlined in the earlier report, including rocket flight dy-
          namics, liquid fuel systems, control of a satellite, and potential launch
sites. The package was circulated by RAND on February 1. One of the
               Stargazing         in Santa        Monica             63


papers, by Lyman Spitzer Jr., a Yale astronomer, accurately predicted
that a satellite would be able to spot and track the movement of ships at
sea, an important advantage in naval operations and combat. This was
one of the reasons the Navy was working on its own satellite plans.
   But the most provocative paper came from Lipp himself. For one
thing, it hammered home the likely political consequences of failing to
move ahead with the development of satellites. "Since mastery of the el-
         ements isa reliable index of material progress," Lipp predicted, "the na-
     tion that makes significant achievements in space travel will be
acknowledged as the world leader in both military and scientific tech-
       niques. To visualize the impact on the world, one can imagine the con-
                 sternation and admiration that would be felt here if the United States
were to discover suddenly that some other nation had already put up a
successful satellite."
   On the hardware front, Lipp offered several important suggestions,
including the first proposal that a high-powered television camera be
placed aboard a satellite that could beam pictures back to earth. Lipp
also looked over the horizon with two other novel ideas. One was to
place a satellite in polar orbit to provide recurring reconnaissance cov-
        erage. The other was to park satellites at very high altitudes — 25,000
miles into space — where their orbit would be synchronous with the ro-
       tation ofthe earth, allowing them to remain continuously over the same
area of the world. The notion of geosynchronous orbit, which made
today's network of communications satellites possible, was first sug-
        gested byArthur C. Clarke, the science fiction writer, in 1944. Lipp
ended his remarkable paper with an exhortation to move ahead immedi-
     ately with the development of satellites.
  The Army Air Force put off review of the RAND papers while the
Pentagon was being reorganized and the Army's aviation operations
were reborn as a separate armed service. A week after creation of the
U.S. Air Force in September 1947, commanders instructed the Air
Materiel Command         to assess the RAND        documents. The verdict, ren-
          dered in December, was mixed: Satellites looked feasible but impracti-
     cal. The Air Force decided to ask RAND to continue planning work on
satellites, looking forward to a time when construction of a system
                         64        Secret      Empire


would make sense and launch vehicles would be developed, but did not
make satellite development a top priority. The message from Washing-
    ton was to keep studying the idea but not to expect the Air Force any-
      time soon to sink a lot of money into actually trying to build a satellite or
get one into orbit. That decision was reaffirmed in 1948 by the Techni-
    cal Evaluation Group, a Pentagon panel of civilian consultants.
   Given the limitations of American rocket technology, these decisions
were hard to argue with, but they left the forward-looking researchers at
RAND frustrated. Davies by this time had joined Lipp's staff and had
quickly learned that Washington was not as excited by satellites as the
folks in Santa Monica. "So much time went into making studies and
studying other people's studies," he recalled. "One of the most difficult
things was to try to convince the government in Washington to put
money into these things."
  Over the next few years, as the demand for intelligence data about So-
    viet military forces increased in Washington, Davies and the rest of
Lipp's staff did as much as they could with the limited mandate and
funding they had been granted by the Air Force. In November 1950,
RAND again urged the Air Force to authorize additional research into
satellite reconnaissance missions. The Air Force intelligence staff
agreed, and a few months later, Bernard Schriever gave the whole idea a
boost by spelling out the Air Force requirements for a spy satellite.
Schriever, who by then had been given a central role in Air Force plan-
      ning, laid out three primary benchmarks at a meeting on February 16,
1951, all related to helping the Air Force learn more about the Soviet
military threat and to select targets for American attack. Schriever stip-
        ulated that photographs must be of sufficient quality and magnification
that potential military targets could be spotted, including airfields, har-
       bors, and industrial plants. A satellite had to provide continuous day-
      time coverage of the Soviet Union and the photographs should be
useful in improving aeronautical charts and maps.
   RAND was anxious to show how such standards could be met. News
coverage of a downed Navy spy flight off the Latvian coast in April 1950
and the outbreak of the Korean War a few months later had given added
urgency to the search for new spy vehicles. In March 1951, Lipp and his
              Stargazing        in Santa       Monica            65


colleagues conducted an elaborate exercise designed to simulate pic-
      tures ofLos Angeles harbor that could be generated by a reconnaissance
satellite equipped with a television camera. Air Force experts deter-
         mined that the images met minimal intelligence requirements. But
doubts persisted because ground features could not be seen in any de-
     tail. The classified RAND study, titled "Utility of a Satellite Vehicle for
Reconnaissance," was completed in April 195 1. It failed to convince the
Air Force that photo coverage would be of high enough quality to war-
      rant development of the proposed system.
   The most significant contribution of the study was serendipitous.
Lipp and several other members of the missile group traveled to Wright
Field in Dayton later in 195 1 to present their ideas to the Air Force lab-
          oratory that had been the source of so much creative thinking about aer-
    ial reconnaissance. The visit brought together for the first time the
proponents of satellites and the architects of advanced camera systems.
The worlds of Mert Davies and Dick Leghorn intersected, and it wasn't
long before the two men themselves met and began to swap ideas. The
collaboration that began in Ohio during the visit eventually led to de-
     sign of the camera and film system that was used in the nation's first
photoreconnaissance satellite.
  Several representatives of the Boston University Optical Research
Lab, which Leghorn had helped dedicate in 1946, happened to be visit-
     ing Wright Field at the same time as Jim Lipp and his RAND col-
           leagues. In Dayton, they were reunited with Amrom Katz, the gifted
physicist who had come to Wright Field from the Census Bureau in the
early 1 940s to help Baker design a camera system for George Goddard
that would automatically adjust to pressure and temperature changes at
high altitude. Katz was the chief physicist at the Dayton reconnaissance
lab. All of these men were initially dubious about satellites. Katz led the
skeptics. "Lipp had a nearly zero batting average," he remembered. "No
one was interested."
  Katz and the other men decided to demonstrate that Lipp's ideas
about television pictures from space were unworkable. From such a
great altitude, with the camera technology then available, the group as-
        sumed the pictures would be worthless to photo interpreters looking for
                        66        Secret     Empire


Soviet military equipment on the ground. Katz later recalled, "We were
going to prove that this proposed project was ridiculous. Mind you, we
didn't know or care about the incidental problems such as making the
launch rocket, achieving stability in orbit and all the other important
parts of the system. We were fastened on the proposed scale to be deliv-
      ered to the TV sensor."
   Katz at the time was struggling with telescopic lenses to get decent
photographs of railroad ties from an altitude of 40,000 feet. He figured
that the smaller lenses on a television camera operating 350 miles in
space would show such a large area of the earth in such little detail that
no useful intelligence could be gleaned from the images. With the help
of Eastman Kodak, Katz managed to mount the lenses from an 8mm
movie camera on a Leica camera. Photographs taken at 30,000 feet with
the camera would roughly simulate the images from Lipp's satellite.
Katz ordered a test flight with the Leica over Dayton. "I was confident
that nothing could be seen on the enlargements."
   When the photos were developed and enlarged, Katz was astonished
to find that he could clearly make out the streets of downtown Dayton
and the runways and buildings at Wright Field. Katz knew that televi-
     sion lenses, or even conventional camera lenses, would have to be im-
           proved, but the notion of collecting useful information from hundreds
of miles in space no longer seemed implausible to him and his col-
leagues.
   It certainly didn't seem improbable to the editors of Collier's maga-
      zine. Eager to spur public interest in the exploration of space, in March
1952 the popular magazine began publishing a series of articles on the
scientific and military uses of space. The Korean War was boiling and
more and more American spy planes were coming under attack as they
approached Soviet airspace. Some of these incidents were making the
news, heightening public sensitivity about the high dangers of the cold
war. Collier's \ like Life and the Saturday Evening Post, the other popular
general-interest magazines of the era, reached millions of Americans
every week and played an important role in setting the national agenda.
The magazine's emphasis on space gave the idea of satellites the kind of
visibility it had never had before. An equivalent jolt of publicity today
              Stargazing        in Santa       Monica            67


might come from a series of "60 Minutes" broadcasts on a single subject
over the course of a year.
   The first piece was by Wernher von Braun, who had moved to the
United States after the war with the assistance of the Army, which was
eager to put his rocket expertise to work. Von Braun described in Col-
     lier's how a manned space station could be used for spying. He imagined
technicians armed with powerful telescopes monitoring activities on
earth and producing photographs as revealing as those made from a
plane at 5,000 feet.
   "Nothing will go unobserved. . . . Despite the vast territory thus cov-
      ered, selected spots on the earth could receive pinpoint examination.
For example, troop maneuvers, planes being readied on the flight deck
of an aircraft carrier, or bombers forming in groups over an airfield will
be clearly discernible. Because of the telescopic eyes and cameras of the
space station, it will be almost impossible for any nation to hide warlike
preparations for any length of time."
   By stimulating public interest in space and satellites, Colliers helped
bring the issue into the political arena. In 1952 the Truman administra-
     tion asked Aristid V. Grosse, a Temple University physicist who had
worked on the Manhattan Project, to investigate the possibility of
building a satellite. Grosse met with von Braun and other scientists and
engineers. He turned in his findings in 1953, after Eisenhower had suc-
        ceeded Truman. The brief paper, delivered that fall to Donald Quarles,
the new assistant secretary of defense for research and development,
noted the potential scientific, military, and political benefits of placing a
satellite in orbit. Though Grosse apparently did not have access to the
RAND     papers and may not even have known of their existence, he con-
        cluded that a satellite equipped with television devices could be "a valu-
    able observation post."
  The Air Force, however, advised Quarles that the report offered no
new technical insights and he, in turn, took no further action on it.
  RAND      pressed ahead with its planning, though Davies and his col-
             leagues were by now thoroughly disgusted with the government's han-
      dling ofsatellites. Davies couldn't fathom why the Beacon Hill study of
Air Force reconnaissance programs had neglected the issue, and he was
                         68        Secret     Empire


angry with Leghorn for not championing satellites in his dual role as an
Air Force planner and Wright Field liaison officer to the Beacon Hill
group. "I scolded Dick," Davies recalled. "He said he had to admit he
thought satellites were too far out for Beacon Hill."
   Davies finally got a chance to petition Leghorn directly in late 1952,
when RAND dispatched him to Washington to work with Leghorn on
his Air Force planning objectives. Leghorn was still largely unfamiliar
with the RAND research on satellites. Davies's job was to fill Leghorn
in on the details and to convert him into an advocate for satellites. He
was pleasantly surprised by the reception he received.
  "We spent the morning talking, then the afternoon. We went to din-
   ner and then continued our discussions until after one a.m. For me, it
was exciting and enjoyable to find someone so capable and interested in
the studies on which we had spent so many years."
   The daylong conversation did not immediately change Leghorn's
mind about satellites, but it made him less resistant. Other RAND re-
           searchers and executives also pressed the Air Force. Though the service
remained unwilling to commit itself to building and launching a satel-
    lite, the Air Force took a major step toward development by authorizing
RAND to go ahead with its most ambitious project yet — preparation of
detailed engineering specifications for a reconnaissance satellite. This
time RAND would work closely with dozens of engineers at aviation
and electronics companies to provide a concrete plan. The effort, led
once again by Jim Lipp, was dubbed "Project Feed Back." Like earlier
conceptions, it revolved around a television system. The satellite would
be powered in orbit by a small nuclear reactor. That idea reflected
overly optimistic expectations at the time about developing nuclear-
powered rockets and other spacecraft.
   Davies was assigned to work on simulated TV images and how they
could be exploited by photo interpreters. He was energized by the
prospect of working on a development plan, though still concerned that
there seemed little immediate prospect of moving satellites from the
drafting board to the launch pad. The Project Feed Back report was
submitted to the Air Force on March 1, 1954, two months before Hal
Austin's perilous flight over Soviet territory. The opening page boldly
              Stargazing          in Santa       Monica              69


declared, "The over-all conclusion to be drawn from studies of simu-
      lated satellite television pictures is that reconnaissance data of consider-
      able value can be obtained, and that complete coverage of Soviet
territory with such pictures will result in a major reversal of our strate-
   gic intelligence posture with respect to the Soviets."
  To quell doubts about the quality of the RAND television system,
which was designed by the Radio Corporation of America, the report
itemized the things that could be recognized from the projected 300-
mile-high orbit. It was a list sure to catch the eye of the Air Force's top
officers and anyone else interested in Soviet military power and the se-
         lection oftargets should there be a war.
   "1. Airfields of all sizes, and possibly indications of activities (the
presence of large planes, etc.) on airfields. 2. Industrial concentrations,
isolated or within cities. 3. Large plants, and possibly some indication of
types of plant. 3. Harbors, and facilities such as graving docks and large
ships. 5. Transportation, power and communication networks, includ-
     ing switching yards, bridges, canals, power lines and perhaps activities
in these fields. 6. Urban areas, including the density of built-up areas.
7. Large military installations, including military camps and explosive
storage. 8. Cloud pattern and structure in considerable detail."
   The report contained dozens of conventional aerial photographs of
American cities and military bases, representing the kind of images that
RAND said could be obtained from space. Like the simulated images of
the harbor area in Los Angeles used in the earlier study, these were
meant to demonstrate that fairly detailed features were visible. The pic-
      tures were impressive but did not provide the kind of close-up views that
were available from conventional aircraft equipped with telephoto
lenses. Despite the RAND claims, it was obvious that Air Force war
planners would have difficulty detecting Soviet aircraft and other spe-
     cific objects that might help SAC with its targeting.
   Lipp, Davies, and their associates estimated the satellite project
would take seven years from inception to launch at a cost of about $165
million ($1.1 billion in today's dollars). The long time frame was ac-
                     knowledgment othe
                                   f technological barriers that would have to be over-
       come in everything from rocket design to communications with the
                        70       Secret     Empire


satellite and relay of the data back to earth. Along with the rocket and
satellite, the project would require construction of ground stations and
sophisticated data processing systems.
  Anticipating a host of novel legal issues about the use of space, in-
        cluding theoretical violations of national sovereignty when American
satellites passed over foreign nations, the report recommended prepara-
      tion of a legal and political strategy to defend American operations in
space. "Use of the satellite might bring a charge of violation of Soviet
sovereignty," the report said. "Probably the Soviets would do every-
       thing in their power to make the charge stick and to exploit it to their
political advantage by making the United States appear as a violator of
international law." As work on satellites progressed in the years ahead,
these issues would loom large in Washington's preparations.
   RAND executives and engineers, determined to see their ideas trans-
      lated into action, traveled to Washington, Wright Field, and other Air
Force locations to elaborate on the Project Feed Back study. "We were
trying to talk the Air Force into funding the project," Davies recalled.
They proved to be good salesmen. With a push from satellite supporters
at the Air Research and Development Command, the new RAND pro-
       posal won new backers at the Pentagon.
   Though still uncertain how practical the idea was, the leadership of
the Air Force gave its blessing to the RAND project. The endorsement
of Gen. Nathan F. Twining, the chief of staff; General LeMay, who was
by this time the SAC commander; and James Doolittle, a World War II
combat hero who was chairman of the Air Force Scientific Advisory
Board, gave the plan the kind of heavyweight support satellite proposals
had long lacked. In August, the Pentagon authorized the Air Force to
begin work on building a reconnaissance satellite. Later in the year, the
job was assigned to the Western Development Division of the Air Re-
          search and Development Command. The division's primary responsi-
        bility was to perfect and build a fleet of intercontinental ballistic
missiles. It was a fortuitous decision, for the division, based in Southern
California, was run by Bernard Schriever, now a brigadier general.
  The years of brainstorming and planning were finally ending and
construction of the real thing was beginning, using the RAND design
              Stargazing         in Santa       Monica             71


scheme as the starting point. But the project in many ways remained a
stepchild of the Pentagon, an alluring but distant objective that prom-
     ised to produce useful pictures of the Soviet landscape but not highly
detailed photos that the SAC staff could put to immediate use. At a time
when television was still in its infancy and most American households
were just acquiring their first black-and-white sets, the technology just
wasn't good enough to make RAND's blueprint the definitive answer to
Washington's intelligence gap. Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson
captured the prevailing attitude when he responded to a prediction in
1954 that the Soviet Union would get a satellite into space before the
United States. "I wouldn't care if they did," he said. RAND itself had es-
          timated aseven-year gestation period for its system, meaning it would
be 1960 before Washington could expect to put a camera system into
orbit. At a time when cold war tensions were growing and the threat of a
Soviet surprise attack seemed possible, the delay and questionable pic-
     ture quality were considered crippling flaws.
  As the Eisenhower administration in 1954 began in earnest to exam-
   ine how to reduce the threat of surprise attack, it found a temporary re-
               con ais ance fixin Dick Leghorn's ideas for an exotic spy plane. In an
ironic quirk of history, Washington seized on his plan long after he had
left the Air Force, and he did not even know about the construction of
the plane until it was nearly ready to fly.
                         CHAPTER          FOUR




                          Seeing Air

Kelly Johnson, America's most inventive airplane designer at
      mid-century, turned Dick Leghorn's aviation alchemy into a
strange and remarkable flying machine. Clarence L. Johnson, nick-
        named Kelly by schoolmates in second grade, was a virtuoso airplane
maker, one of the most brilliant and prolific in the annals of aviation. He
coupled a wonderfully intuitive feel for aerodynamic design with a
brusque but highly effective management style. Under his inspired di-
        rection, the Advanced Development Projects division at Lockheed, bet-
    ter known as the Skunk Works, turned out many of America's most
advanced military aircraft in the twentieth century, beginning in 1943
with the development of the P-80, later redesignated the F-80, the
country's first tactical jet fighter, dubbed the "Shooting Star" by Lock-
       heed. In a career that ran from 1933 to 1975, he designed more than
forty airplanes. One of the first was the P-38 Lightning, a propeller-
driven fighter that played a starring role in World War II. Johnson's cus-
     tom plane shop in Burbank, in the San Fernando Valley just over the
Hollywood hills from Los Angeles, worked under tight secrecy and
daunting deadlines. It produced the U-2 and then later the ultra-high-
performance A- 12 Oxcart, better known as the SR-71 Blackbird, the
name of the Air Force model. After Johnson's retirement, the Skunk
Works developed the F- 1 1 7 stealth fighter.
   The Air Force didn't ask Johnson to design Dick Leghorn's spy plane.
In fact, it deliberately excluded Lockheed in 1952 when it began think-
     ing more seriously about building a new high-flying reconnaissance
plane in the wake of the Beacon Hill report. But with help from some

                                     72
                          Seeing     Air        75


well-placed friends in Washington and a pivotal assist in 1954 from
Trevor Gardner, James Killian, and Edwin Land, Johnson crashed the
Air Force party. His design was so simple and yet so audacious that it
trumped rival plans by other aircraft companies and won the support of
President Eisenhower in October 1954. As Johnson promised, the first
U-2 was in the air, under budget, nine months later, an uncommon
achievement in an industry that routinely missed deadlines and ex-
       ceeded planned expenditures, especially in the production of radically
new airplanes.
   Kelly Johnson was ideally suited for the assignment, so much so it's
hard to understand why the Air Force didn't turn to him in the first
place. Born on February 27, 1910, in the northern Michigan mining
hamlet of Ishpeming, not far from Marquette, he was the seventh of
nine children born to his Swedish immigrant parents — his father was a
bricklayer, his mother a homemaker. Once he discovered the Carnegie
library in town, he visited it every day and practically inhaled the collec-
     tion of Tom Swift books, including Tom Swift and his Aeroplane. Johnson
was captivated by the aviation and engineering details. "I read other
books on aircraft — the Rover Boys, Collins's book on model airplanes —
and decided by the time I was 12 years old that I would be an aircraft de-

signer."
  The family moved downstate to Flint in 1923. There was a building
boom in the industrial city, and Johnson's father, Peter, opened a con-
        struction business, which prospered. Johnson worked at lathing houses
in the summers, developing the Popeye forearms that made him virtu-
     ally unbeatable in the arm wrestling competitions that later became a
custom at the Skunk Works when the staff got together to celebrate the
first successful flight of a new plane. After finishing high school, he en-
        rolled atFlint Junior College, where he studied physics, mathematics,
and calculus and got his first taste of engineering. Johnson was eager to
learn to fly, and for $5, a princely sum at the time, he got his first ride in
the air in a four-passenger biplane. He enjoyed the bumpy, noisy three-
minute flight and not long afterward showed up at Bishop Airport in
Flint with his life savings of $300 to sign up for ten flying lessons. Once
the instructor learned that Johnson wanted to be an airplane designer,
                          74        Secret      Empire


he urged him to keep the money for a college education. Johnson reluc-
       tantly decided it was good advice, and transferred to the University of
Michigan in Ann Arbor in 1929. He was soon spending long hours
studying aerodynamics in the university's wind tunnel as an assistant to
Professor Edward A. Stalker, the chairman of the aeronautical engi-
         neering department.
   Johnson was a natural. He loved the wind tunnel work and got per-
          mission from Stalker to rent the lab for private jobs, including tests on a
new streamlined car that Studebaker was planning to build. Johnson
found that the large headlamps slowed the car at high speeds by creating
considerable wind resistance. The company redesigned the front end to
fit the headlights into the fender. It was a preview of things to come for
Johnson.
   When he graduated in 1932, jobs were scarce because of the Depres-
     sion. Sikorsky, Martin, and Curtiss, the main East Coast aircraft compa-
      nies, told him not to even bother to visit. Johnson applied to the Army's
air service, expecting to become an aviation cadet, but was rejected be-
        cause ofan old eye injury. Johnson and a friend decided to head for Cal-
             ifornia inhopes of finding work at one of the airplane manufacturers
that were starting to congregate in the region. They borrowed a profes-
      sor's Chevrolet to make the trip. To save money on gas, Johnson tin-
       kered with the engine, picking up three or four miles per gallon during
the cross-country drive. Lockheed, which had made a name for itself as
a builder of plywood aircraft and then fallen into bankruptcy during the
Depression, had just been bought from receivers for $40,000 by Robert
and Courtlandt Gross and some other flying enthusiasts. Richard von
Hake, the chief engineer, told Johnson to return in a year when the
company was likely to be hiring.
  Johnson did a year of graduate work at Michigan, picking up a
master's degree, and once again using the wind tunnel for a variety of
tests. By chance, the university had contracted with Lockheed to check
the design of the Electra, a new all-metal airplane the reorganized com-
      pany was hoping to introduce as its first product. Stalker tested models
in the wind tunnel. Despite some misgivings about stability and direc-
       tional control, he determined the problems were no worse than other
                           Seeing     Air         75


aircraft. Johnson was dubious and didn't hesitate to tell Lockheed's top
executives when he returned to Burbank for a job interview in 1933.
Hall L. Hibbard, the new chief engineer, and Cyril Chappellet, assistant
to the president and personnel officer, were stunned when Johnson
cheekily announced that the plane was unstable and that Stalker's wind-
tunnel reports were invalid.
   The two men were put off by Johnson's arrogance, but decided to
give him a chance to prove his point. After a few months of training in
California, Johnson was sent back to the Michigan wind tunnel with the
Electra model in the backseat of his car. He put the model through
dozens of tests before isolating the problem and figuring how to fix it.
Johnson recommended redesigning the horizontal tail section to get
more directional stability and added vertical tails to supplement the sin-
    gle vertical tail and rudder in the original design. He then found the
original vertical tail in the center was unnecessary and removed it. The
result was a novel twin vertical tail configuration that became the hall-
       mark design feature of the plane. The triple tail design employed in the
Lockheed Constellation airliner flown by many commercial carriers in
the 1940s and 1950s came from the same wind-tunnel tests.
   Once Johnson was hired, his talent and hard work quickly made him
a Lockheed favorite, though his brashness and explosive temper created
frictions. As he settled into his engineering work, he made good on his
promise to become a pilot, which allowed him to act as the primary
flight test engineer for the Electra. The airtime, and near crashes that
came with test flying, convinced Johnson that airplane designers needed
to see their projects from a pilot's perspective. He continued to fly for
years, even after becoming a senior executive. "I figured I needed to
have the hell scared out of me once a year in order to keep a proper bal-
      ance and viewpoint on designing new aircraft."
   With his knack for innovation, Johnson yearned to set up a small ex-
                  perimental department at Lockheed where airplane designers and
builders could work together free from the bureaucratic conventions of
a large industrial corporation. He figured that by getting everyone in-
        volved with the creation of a new plane under the same roof, he could
encourage ingenuity and slash the time between design and fabrication.
                        76       Secret     Empire


If the plane designers worked next to the production floor, it would be
easier to solve problems that developed as a plane was being assembled.
He got his wish in 1 943 when he won the Army Air Forces' contract to
produce a prototype jet fighter. Johnson and Lockheed were chosen be-
      cause he had designed the twin-engine P-38 Lightning, the most agile
propeller-driven fighter produced during the war. Lockheed was al-
      ready overextended turning out other planes for the Pentagon, but ex-
          ecutives told Johnson, who was by then the company's chief research
engineer, to go ahead with the experimental project, provided he could
come up with the engineers and production staff and find some unused
space at the Burbank plant.
  Johnson seized the opportunity, employing a gift for improvisation.
He quickly recruited two dozen of the best designers and a similar num-
    ber of mechanics, then created a makeshift office in an open area near
the Lockheed wind tunnel. To get the tools to build the plane, he
arranged to buy out a local machine shop. For walls, he took the wood
from dismantled crates that had been used to ship engines for the Hud-
     son bomber, a modified version of the Electra that Johnson had de-
         signed for the British Royal Air Force. To cover the new work area,
Johnson rented a circus tent. The Skunk Works was up and running.
The plane was ready for its maiden flight 143 days after Johnson started
work, well ahead of the Army deadline.
  Johnson's reputation soon grew to epic proportions within Lock-
      heed. Ben Rich, who joined Lockheed in 1954 as a thermodynamics
specialist, described Johnson as an awe-inspiring figure to young engi-
       neers, though not necessarily in appearance. "All of us had seen him
rushing around in his untucked shirt, a paunchy, middle-aged guy with a
comical duck's waddle, slicked-down white hair and a belligerent jaw.
He had a thick, round nose and reminded me a lot of W. C. Fields but
without the humor."
   After watching Johnson redesign the Electra as the Hudson bomber
in three intense days of drafting, Hall Hibbard, one of the men who had
hired Johnson, said, "That damned Swede can actually see air." New
employees like Rich soon encountered Johnson's uncanny instincts
themselves. One day as Rich was working on the design of an inlet for a
                          Seeing Air             77


jet engine, Johnson stopped by his desk, holding a drawing of the part.
"It will be way too draggy," he told Rich. "It's about 20 percent too big.
Re figure it." Rich spent the rest of the day recalculating the design and
found the inlet was 18 percent too large.
  James Plummer, who later modeled Lockheed's secret satellite devel-
          opment office on the Skunk Works, studied Johnson's management
techniques before setting up the satellite operation in Palo Alto. "They
were working on the U-2," Plummer recalled. "One day Kelly stopped
to talk with an engineer who's working some problem about the exit
nozzle on the engine. This guy is working like crazy and he's got a
freshly made clay model of the nozzle sitting in front of him. Kelly took
one look at it and announced, 'Not that way.' He grabbed the model,
took his big old thumb and squished the clay into a different shape. This
poor guy is just sitting there, figuring his work is shot. But the old man
was right. It was amazing the way he ran that program."
   Johnson's no-nonsense style carried over to corporate meetings. "All
the divisions of Lockheed would get together periodically and their
managers would report on their work," Plummer said. "Most of them
would make a big presentation. Kelly would just walk up to the black-
       board and write down a sales number and a profit number. He'd say,
'That's how much I sold, and that's how much I made. Now I've got to
get back to work.'"
   Bud Wheelon got to know Johnson well after taking over the CIA's
aircraft operations in 1963. "He had enormous self-assurance,"
Wheelon said. "He was a towering personality. He knew all of aeronau-
     tical engineering and he drove his people hard, he expected a lot of
them. He cursed like a sailor. He intimidated them, but he also led them
and they loved him. He was an absolute patriot, he loved this country.
He was headstrong, he was brilliant."
   The Air Force was well aware of Johnson's skills as its interest in
building a new reconnaissance aircraft began to grow in mid- 1952, fol-
        lowing the June delivery of the Beacon Hill study and its recommenda-
     tion to develop a high-altitude spy plane. The Air Force's first move was
to ask the Martin Aircraft Company to examine the possibility of adapt-
    ing the B-57 bomber to enable it to fly at 64,000 feet. This plan was the
                         78        Secret     Empire


Pentagon's belated response to Dick Leghorn's previously rebuffed sug-
        gestion to reconfigure the British Canberra bomber by extending the
wings, adding more powerful engines, and stripping the plane of armor
plating and other combat gear. Martin was already making the B-57, an
American version of the Canberra that it was producing under license
with the English manufacturer.
   The Wright Air Development Command in Dayton had its own
ideas. Maj. John Seaberg, an aeronautical engineer recalled to active
duty at Wright Field as the Korean War wore on, investigated a number
of options for high-altitude flight with two German experts who had
moved to the United States after the war. The three men produced a
rough proposal in March 1953, the same month that Stalin died, de-
        scribing asubsonic aircraft that would fly at 70,000 feet or higher with a
round-trip range of about 3,500 miles and could carry up to 700 pounds
of reconnaissance equipment. In July, the development command in
Dayton gave contracts for initial study of the proposed plane to Bell Air-
     craft Corporation of Buffalo, New York, and the Fairchild Engine and
Airplane Corporation of Hagerstown, Maryland. Despite Kelly
Johnson's formidable reputation, the Air Force bypassed Lockheed in
the mistaken belief that the California company — and other high-
volume airplane makers — would not give the project sufficient atten-
tion.
  As the Air Force revved up efforts to design a spy plane, it also ap-
         pointed anew panel of outside advisers on intelligence matters. The ad-
      visory board, called the Intelligence Systems Panel, was formed in July
1953 largely to help guide the Air Force in development of the kind of
plane Dick Leghorn championed and the Beacon Hill report had en-
        dorsed. The high-powered group included several of the most inventive
and visionary members of the Beacon Hill committee. Jim Baker, the
Harvard lens designer, served as chairman. Edwin Land of Polaroid was
a member, as was Allen F. Donovan, head of the Aeromechanics De-
         partment at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory.
   Sometime in November 1953 — the precise date is uncertain — Lock-
      heed first heard about the Air Force initiatives. John H. Carter, who had
recently retired from the Air Force to go to work at Lockheed, learned
                            Seeing      Air          79


about the plans from Eugene Kiefer during a visit to the Pentagon. As
soon as he returned to Burbank, Carter urged company executives to
get into the competition. His memo speculated about the useful lifetime
of the airplane. "If extreme altitude performance can be realized in a
practical aircraft at speeds in the vicinity of Mach 0.8, it should be capa-
    ble of avoiding virtually all Russian defenses until about 1960.
   Carter advised that development of the plane would "require very
strenuous efforts and extraordinary procedures, as well as non-standard
design philosophy." This might include elimination of conventional
landing gear and the rejection of the usual military specifications, in-
          cluding armor, defensive weapons, and even a cabin pressurization sys-
     tem. The challenge sounded perfect for Johnson and his team. Once
Lockheed's top executives approved the idea, in December 1953, John-
    son set to work designing a plane that would meet Carter's — and by ex-
                  tension, Leghorn's — expectations. Lockheed called the aircraft the
CL-2 82. Johnson noted in his log, "We started an investigation of wing
area modifications and stripping procedures to modify the F-104 air-
          plane to get the maximum possible altitude for reconnaissance pur-

 poses."
   Carter had not overstated the need for unorthodox thinking. Ultra-
      high altitude flight was a novelty in 1954. Some experimental aircraft
had soared briefly to the rarified regions designated for the new spy
plane, which was roughly 13 miles above sea level. In August 1953, a
rocket-powered D-558-2, a swept- wing plane made for the Navy by the
Douglas Aircraft Company, set a new altitude record of 83,000 feet.
  But no jet-powered plane had soared that high and no manned air-
     craft of any kind could fly for sustained periods anywhere near that
height — or the cruising level of 65,000 feet anticipated for the CL-2 82.
The thin air posed numerous obstacles to man and machine. It meant
reduced lift from the passage of air over the wings, the basic physical
force that keeps planes aloft. The performance of jet engines would be
diminished because there was less oxygen for the compression and
burning. A jet engine operating at 70,000 feet would produce just 6 per-
     cent of the thrust it generated at sea level. The weight of the aircraft,
among other things, had to be adjusted accordingly, for lightness was an
                       80        Secret     Empire


essential requirement for long-distance flight at high altitude. Fuel was
another potential problem. Conventional JP-4 kerosene fuel would boil
off and evaporate because of the low air pressure at 70,000 feet. A new
blend of jet fuel would have to be created.
   Sustaining life in the stratosphere was no less challenging. Fluids in
the human body, including blood, vaporize above 65,000 feet. Reduced
air pressure would sharply increase the stress on the cardiovascular sys-
      tem. While a pressurized cockpit would reduce these dangers, it would
not eliminate them entirely. A special pressurized flight suit would be
needed to maintain constant pressure over most of a pilot's body if cabin
pressure was lost or the pilot was forced to bail out at 70,000 feet and de-
       scend byparachute. In such an emergency descent, a pilot would get the
bends from a buildup of nitrogen in the blood, the same potentially
deadly affliction divers encounter if they rise too rapidly to the ocean
surface from great depths. That danger also had to be addressed.
  Johnson's solution to the aerodynamic problems was radical but ele-
     gant. He designed what can best be described as a subsonic jet-powered
glider or sailplane. The plane's distinguishing feature was its elongated,
narrow wings, which gave the aircraft a wingspan of 70 feet, 8 inches.
The extra length meant more wing surface area, which gave the aircraft
added lift. The large wings also provided space for four fuel tanks that
could hold a total of 1 ,3 50 gallons of fuel, enough to fly ten hours and to
cover about 4,000 nautical miles, the range required to traverse large
areas of the Soviet Union. To save weight, Johnson proposed the use of
separate, detachable wing panels that would be bolted to the fuselage
rather than a single wing section supported by a spar that passed
through the fuselage. A continuous spar — the norm in aircraft construc-
    tion— was sturdier but much heavier. The wing design also opened up
space in the body of the plane for photographic equipment. By using
lightweight materials, Johnson managed to reduce the weight of the
wings by two thirds compared to those of conventional aircraft.
   In another weight-saving step that borrowed from gliders, Johnson
designed a tail assembly that would be attached to the fuselage with just
three five-eighths-inch high-tensile steel bolts. He also decided to do
without a pressurized cockpit and to dispense with normal landing gear,
                          Seeing     Air         81


two decisions he would later have to reverse to win government sup-
      port. His alternative to landing gear was to fit the bottom of the plane
with two skis and to reinforce the belly. Instead of setting down on
wheels, the plane would do a belly landing and skid to a stop on the skis.
For takeoff, Johnson planned a wheeled dolly that would be discarded as
the plane became airborne. This, too, was typical of a glider. The fuse-
     lage would be constructed with unusually thin aluminum. To power the
plane, Johnson selected the General Electric J73/GE3 turbojet engine,
which produced 9,300 pounds of thrust. Unlike Bell Aircraft, which was
designing a, twin-engine plane for John Seaberg at Wright Field, John-
    son preferred a single-engine airplane, in part to reduce weight and fuel
consumption. Lockheed had used the General Electric engine in the
F-104 jet fighter, another Johnson aircraft.
   The CL-282, with its long wings and lack of landing gear, would look
unlike any jet airplane that had ever been built. It would also be far more
fragile. The airframe was designed to withstand a stress of 2.5 g's, less
than half that required for military aircraft. Johnson's plane would carry
no armaments to defend itself, counting on its high-altitude capability
to provide protection from Soviet fighters and antiaircraft missiles,
which could not operate effectively above 50,000 feet. The combination
of plane design and the thin air where it would fly left a very small mar-
    gin for error by pilots. Once they had reached maximum altitude, pilots
would have to maintain a constant speed of between 388 and 394 knots
per hour. If they went slower, the plane would stall and begin falling at a
rate that would break loose the wings and tail section. If they exceeded
the top speed, violent buffeting would tear the wings off. The elite
group of pilots who were later chosen to handle the plane mordantly
called this cramped safety range the "coffin corner."
   A little more than a week after getting the design assignment from
Lockheed, Johnson presented his bosses with a twenty-three-page
memo describing the main features of the CL-282. About this time,
Seaberg and his colleagues in Dayton were reviewing the plans submit-
    ted by Bell and Fairchild for a new reconnaissance plane and Martin's
proposal to modify the B-57. They rejected Fairchild's proposal to build
a single-engine plane with a maximum altitude of 67,200 feet. Seaberg
                        82        Secret     Empire


recommended approval of Bell's plan, which called for a twin-engine
aircraft that could fly at 69,500 feet. He also urged the Air Force to
move ahead with modification of the B-57 as a temporary measure that
would allow spy flights at 64,000 feet while Bell was building its higher-
flying plane. The Air Force soon approved the Martin proposal and
seemed inclined to endorse the Bell aircraft. Lockheed had to act
quickly if it was to get into the competition.
   In early March 1954, Johnson flew back to Washington to lay out his
plan to General Schriever's Office of Development Planning. Leghorn
had departed a year earlier, but two of his closest aides, Gene Kiefer and
Bud Wienberg, were still present. They were intrigued by Johnson's
ideas and urged Schriever to take the next step of asking Lockheed to
submit a detailed proposal. He did so, and Johnson returned to the Pen-
       tagon in April for a meeting with senior civilian and military leaders of
the Air Force, including Trevor Gardner and Lt. Gen. Donald L. Putt,
the deputy chief of staff for development. Johnson sought approval to
build thirty planes. He noted in his logs after the meeting that Gardner
and the other civilians seemed more interested in his design than the Air
Force officers.
  He was right, though he did not realize that his appearance coincided
with the Eisenhower administration's heightened interest in advances in
Soviet armaments, including Moscow's missile development program
and the introduction of the Bison bomber, which had first been spotted
at Ramenskoye airfield outside Moscow              a year earlier. Between
Johnson's two visits to Washington, Eisenhower had met with Lee
DuBridge's Science Advisory Committee to discuss the threat of sur-
      prise attack, the culmination of Gardner's aggressive lobbying cam-
        paign. After the meeting, DuBridge asked James Killian to consider
what additional steps might be taken to study and respond to the threat.
Unbeknownst to Johnson, Washington was mobilizing to deal with pre-
       cisely the kind of dangers that his airplane was designed to detect, and
people like Gardner and Schriever were eager to find more effective,
less vulnerable ways of collecting intelligence on Soviet forces.
   The intervention of Gardner and others was fortuitous. The Air
Force high command thought the CL-282 design was a dud. When
                         Seeing     Air        83


Kiefer, Wienberg, and Burton Klein, a RAND economist who worked
in the Office of Development Planning, took the Lockheed plan to
General LeMay in early April, the SAC commander walked out of the
meeting, telling Kiefer and Wienberg they were wasting his time with a
plane that had no guns or landing gear. He said he could put cameras
aboard his B-36 bombers if he needed high-altitude photographs.
   Not long after that, as Kiefer, Wienberg, and Klein were headed
down K Street in Washington to go bowling at a duck pin alley, Klein
suggested that they pitch the CL-282 to Richard Bissell, a friend and
fellow economist who had recently joined the CIA. They got Schriever
to invite Bissell over to the Pentagon for a briefing about the Lockheed
proposal and its potential benefits. "Bissell was immediately impressed
and showed great interest in this airplane," Klein recalled. But the visit
produced no official sign of interest from the Agency. Bissell himself
seemed to forget his first brush with the plane and did not mention it
years later when recounting how he learned about the Lockheed air-
craft.
  On June 7, Johnson was officially notified that the Air Force had de-
     cided to reject his proposal. The letter to Lockheed said the Air Force
was already committed to building the modified Martin B-57. The ser-
     vice had also decided to proceed with construction of Bell's proposed
twin-engine spy plane, called the X-16.
  After reading the rejection, Johnson noted in his log, "Received a let-
   ter which turned down our proposal on the basis that it was too unusual,
that it was a single-engine aircraft and that they were already committed
to the Martin program." But the ground was shifting in Washington —
in Kelly Johnson's and Mert Davies's favor.
                         CHAPTER           FIVE




        "I Think I Have the Plane
              You Are After"

Before the year was out, the Air Force verdict was overturned.
     Ironically, the reversal was largely the work of just the kind of out-
    side scientists and experts that Hap Arnold had embraced when he ran
the Army Air Corps. Though some of the formal consulting mecha-
      nisms that he nurtured had atrophied after his retirement in 1946, the
spirit of innovation and ingenuity that he had instilled endured in quiet
corners of the Pentagon like Bernard Schriever's office. Then, encour-
      aged byDwight Eisenhower's own faith in technology and his openness
to new ideas, the Arnold approach to weapons development flourished
anew in the mid-1950s. The partnership between the government, sci-
      ence, and private industry during the Eisenhower years contributed in
no small measure to the preservation of American security during the
cold war and Washington's eventual victory in the long struggle with
the Soviet Union. The first beneficiary was the CL-282.
   The pivotal benefactors were Jim Killian and Edwin Land, with an
important assist from Allen Donovan, the Cornell aeronautical expert.
Donovan quickly saw the advantages of Kelly Johnson's simple design
when he got a firsthand look at the Lockheed drawings during a visit to
Burbank in early August of 1954. As a teenager in upstate New York,
Donovan had learned how to fly sailplanes, known more familiarly as
gliders. He immediately realized that Johnson had come up with a jet-
powered glider that could realistically cruise above 70,000 feet. He liked



                                    84
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane        You Are After"                  85

the use of a single engine, the extended wings, and the overall weight of
the plane, which was much less than the usual military jet aircraft.
   Donovan, who had traveled to Burbank as a member of Jim Baker's
Air Force advisory panel, returned east on August 8 and immediately
told Baker of his enthusiasm for the CL-282. Within days of Donovan's
call to Baker, two other panel members, Land and Philip Strong of the
CIA, met in Washington to discuss the Lockheed proposal. Strong
showed Kelly Johnson's conceptual drawing of the aircraft to Land and
informed him that the Air Force had rejected the plane. Land quickly
phoned Baker, who was also in Washington. <cJim, I think I have the
plane you are after."
   Baker's Intelligence Systems Panel, a creature of the Air Force, was
powerless to rescue the Lockheed proposal because the service had al-
       ready made the decision to move ahead with the Martin B-57 and the
Bell X-16. But Land and Baker could save the CL-282. As members of a
separate, White House study of intelligence matters that was just gear-
    ing up as part of Jim Killian's high-powered review of the threat of sur-
         prise attack, Baker and Land had a direct line into the Oval Office
through Killian, and Land was not shy about using it to circumvent the
Air Force and the CIA.
  The Killian study team, known officially as the Technological Capa-
      bilities Panel and informally as the surprise attack panel, was formed by
Eisenhower in 1954 to examine the state of American military and intel-
         ligence technology in light of the growing threat of a Soviet surprise at-
     tack. The idea for the secret study grew out of the rising concern in
Washington about the Soviet military threat. Thanks in part to Trevor
Gardner's evangelical efforts, the study was initiated by Eisenhower at
the March 27, 1954, meeting the president had held with Lee Du-
Bridge's Science Advisory Committee. After the meeting, DuBridge
asked Killian, a member of the advisory committee, to come up with a
plan. Killian recommended the creation, in his words, "of a technical
task force to study ways of avoiding surprise attack by a searching review
of weapons and intelligence technology." On July 26, Eisenhower for-
      mally invited Killian to direct the study. Killian, in turn, recruited James
                        86        Secret      Empire


B. Fisk, later to become head of Bells Labs, as associate director, and the
two men soon named a small steering committee that included
DuBridge, James Doolittle, the retired Air Force general, and Edwin
Land.
  The steering group selected three primary issues for study — conti-
       nental defense, striking power, and intelligence — and established a sep-
     arate subcommittee for each. Land was put in charge of the intelligence
panel. Killian and Fisk assembled a professional staff of some forty sci-
       entists and engineers to work with the steering committee and subcom-
           mittees. The work began in earnest in September and continued for five
months. The study's findings were presented to Eisenhower at a Na-
       tional Security Council meeting on February 14, 1955.
   The Killian panel played a pivotal role in preparing the U.S. military
and intelligence agencies to wage the cold war. Unlike most presidential
commissions, which produce anodyne, quickly forgotten reports on na-
        tional problems, the Killian group looked unblinkingly at the anemic
state of American defenses against nuclear attack and delivered dozens
of recommendations that were soon put into effect at the insistence of
President Eisenhower. The study's great importance was in emphasiz-
    ing the critical role that advanced technologies could play in strength-
        ening the nation's security, and specifically in stressing the need to
accelerate the development of many of the advanced weapons and intel-
          ligence systems that Washington would come to rely on in the ensuing
decades of the cold war. These systems included intercontinental and
intermediate range ballistic missiles, early-warning radar networks, the
submarine-launched Polaris missile, and the U-2 spy plane and spy
satellites.

  The panel's formation came during a period of estrangement be-
     tween science and the government that was provoked by the McCarthy
witch hunts, especially the Atomic Energy Commission's removal in
1953 of the security clearances of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the physicist
who had directed the Manhattan Project. Oppenheimer had served as
chairman of the Commission's General Advisory Committee. Land and
many of the other men recruited by Killian were outraged by the Op-
           penheimer case, but they set aside their animosity toward Washington
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane        You Are After"                  SI


to serve on the panel. A desire to exercise power and to play a more cen-
     tral role in the nation's affairs may have been a motivation for some. But
Killian believed the scientists "felt an obligation to their country that
overrode their dismay about a single administration."
   Killian himself, though an MIT graduate, was not a scientist. But he
was a man of great intellectual range and a gifted administrator who
commanded the respect and loyalty of scientists across the country. He
had a knack for working smoothly with strong-minded scientists and
bringing them to a common conclusion. One of his successors as presi-
     dent of MIT, Paul E. Gray, said of Killian, "At times of contention he
was peerless in the easing of tensions, the resolving of differences, and
the achievement of consensus, which makes advance possible."
   A native of Blacksburg, South Carolina, where he was born in 1904,
Killian initially enrolled at Trinity College in his home state (the school
later became Duke University), then transferred to MIT, where he read
widely in the humanities while fulfilling the university's core require-
       ments in math and engineering. His intention was to follow his father
into the textile industry, and upon graduation Killian considered job of-
     fers from the textile division of the Goodrich Tire and Rubber Com-
     pany and from Goodyear.
  But other interests intervened. Killian was drawn to journalism, and
he served as editor of the campus paper, The Tech, during his senior year.
"I was an ardent addict of H. L. Mencken . . . and in my best imitation
of Mencken's style I occasionally lambasted the Institute's administra-
         tion," he recalled in a memoir. Killian 's polemics brought him into con-
     tact with Harold Lobdell, a member of the dean of students' staff. The
two struck up a friendship and Lobdell invited Killian to write an occa-
          sional column on undergraduate education for the MIT alumni maga-
      zine, Technology Review. He became the publication's editor in 1930 and
from there was recruited by Karl T. Compton, the Institute's president,
to be his executive assistant. After rising through a variety of adminis-
        trative posts, and helping to organize MIT's extensive wartime research
projects, he succeeded Compton as president in 1949.
   When Killian later became the first White House science adviser, a
profile in the New York Times said, "His somewhat cherubic counte-
                        88        Secret     Empire


nance masks the inquisitive tough-mindedness behind it. He is as dis-
armingly pleasant as a successful hotel manager. Yet he can stand before
an audience of scholars and get to the core of the problem of acute
shortages of scientific teachers by warning that 'there has been avoid-
      ance, ifnot evasion, of the intellectual tax which must be paid if our in-
              tellectual budget is to be balanced.' "
   Under Killian's skillful leadership, the Technological Capabilities
Panel gave science a leading role in Washington. Other postwar proj-
     ects and advisory boards, including the Beacon Hill group, the Air
Force's Scientific Advisory Board and Intelligence Systems Panel, and
the Atomic Energy Commission's General Advisory Committee, had
encouraged cooperation between scientists and defense planners, with
some success. One of the most effective was the Strategic Missiles Eval-
       uation Committee, headed by John von Neumann, a brilliant mathe-
          matician atPrinceton's Institute for Advanced Study who had helped
design the first atomic and hydrogen bombs. It recommended a crash
program to build intercontinental missiles. The von Neumann report,
submitted to the Pentagon in February 1954, gave new impetus and co-
         herence to the missile-development program. Bernard Schriever was
soon put in charge of the effort, which Eisenhower made the military's
top priority. The program, based in Inglewood, California, was later
given the added responsibility of creating a spy satellite.
  But even after the von Neumann committee completed its work, sci-
        entists largely remained on the periphery of defense policy and pro-
        grams. Itwas not until Eisenhower turned to Killian and his associates
in 1954 that science was given a decisive role in shaping the nation's cold
war defenses. As his presidency progressed, Eisenhower relied increas-
      ingly on scientists for advice on military and arms control matters.
   Eisenhower left the nation few greater legacies as president than his
abiding faith in science as an indispensable partner with the government
in preserving the nation's security. His interest in science predated his
election as president. As a cadet at West Point, he studied mathematics
and engineering. As Supreme Allied Commander in World War II,
Eisenhower saw the lifesaving benefits produced by the scientists who
broke the German codes and developed radar, and he recognized the
  "I Think       I Have      the Plane        You Are After"                  89


destructive potential of the V-2 rockets that Germany fired toward
London. He knew that the invention of the atomic bomb had speeded
the defeat of Japan. In 1946, when serving as army chief of staff, Eisen-
       hower stressed the importance of scientific work in a memo to top com-
           manders and civilian officials. It captured some of the enlightened ideas
about the role of science that Eisenhower later applied during his presi-
      dency to the development of new military technologies.
   "Scientists and industrialists," he said in the memo, "must be given
the greatest possible freedom to carry out their research. The fullest uti-
          lization bythe Army of the civilian resources of the nation cannot be
procured merely by prescribing the military characteristics and require-
       ments of certain types of equipment. Scientists and industrialists are
more likely to make new and unsuspected contributions to the develop-
       ment of the Army if detailed directions are held to a minimum. ..."
   After the war, Eisenhower served for five years as the president of Co-
            lumbia University, where he formed friendships with a number of top
scientists, including I. I. Rabi, winner of the 1944 Nobel Prize in
physics. Rabi, who was born in Austria and joined the Columbia faculty
in 1929, had worked on the development of radar and the atomic bomb
and served as an adviser to the Atomic Energy Commission. Eisen-
       hower often called on Rabi for advice during his years in the White
House. "Eisenhower had a warm, personal regard for Rabi," recalled
Gen. Andrew Goodpaster, who served as Eisenhower's staff secretary at
the White House. "Any time I told him that Rabi was coming down to
Washington to see him, the president would say, 'Oh, that's wonderful,
that's wonderful.' " As Columbia's president, Eisenhower also came to
know Killian, his counterpart at MIT. The two men first met in 1948
when Killian attended Eisenhower's inauguration as Columbia's presi-
dent.
  Eisenhower clearly relished the blunt, independent advice he got
from Killian and company. He entrusted them with sensitive secrets, ap-
          preciated their discretion, and liked the fact that their judgment was not
swayed by institutional loyalties and the parochial interests of the mili-
     tary services. As a former commander and army chief of staff, Eisen-
         hower knew as well as anyone how narrow-minded and self-serving the
                        90       Secret     Empire


services could be in making budget decisions and planning new weapons
systems. After the war, he had assembled a group of young Army officers
to think about the Army of the future and the role it would play in
America's defense. He made clear he did not want another predictable
Pentagon report. "There's only one instruction for you people," he told
the officers, "and that is to take instruction from nobody."
   Not long before Eisenhower died in 1969, Killian paid him a last visit
at Walter Reed Hospital. "You know, Jim," Eisenhower told him, "this
bunch of scientists was one of the few groups that I encountered in
Washington who seemed to be there to help the country and not help
themselves."
   Eisenhower once told Land, "Oh, I'm so grateful to you fellows who
are out of town! You can't think in Washington. You go away and think
and then you tell me what you've been thinking. There's no way to think
if you live here."
    Reflecting on the creative partnership between Eisenhower and his
science advisers, Killian noted that access to the Oval Office was a criti-
    cal factor. As chairman of the surprise attack committee, and later as the
White House science adviser, Killian moved freely across the top levels
of government, including the West Wing. He saw Eisenhower several
times a week. "My ready access to President Eisenhower made it possi-
    ble for me promptly to bring to him, and to open opportunities for oth-
     ers to bring to him, new and important technologies, concepts and
analyses that added to the strength of our nation."
   The scientists and engineers whom Eisenhower turned to for advice
were not specialists in military or intelligence technology. "What they
did possess," Killian noted, "were imagination, creative powers, and a
deep understanding of physical science and technology (and perhaps
equally important, a simple love of country); and these enabled them
rapidly to come to grips with weapons technology, to bring fresh points
of view to bear, and to make contributions to it in a way that more rou-
     tine people with less deep mastery of science and technology could not

  The fact that Killian, Land, and other scientists served together on a
  do."
number of different advisory panels fostered productive brainstorming
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane        You Are After"                  91


on a wide range of issues. Killian observed that this "interdisciplinary
congeniality," as he put it, "made it possible to achieve an extraordinary
synthesis of minds and ideas to aid the president in achieving his goals in
shaping our defense and intelligence programs and policies."
   Edwin Land's route to these high-octane councils and his pivotal role
is shaping revolutionary new spy technologies was anything but con-
          ventional or predictable. In many ways, he was an unlikely figure to lead
the United States into a new era in spying. Land was primarily known in
the 1950s as the creator of instant photography and the founder and
guiding mind behind the Polaroid Corporation, the roles that still de-
     fine his reputation today, more than a decade after his death. A short, in-
         tense man with dark hair and a piercing gaze, he was one of the most
gifted and prolific inventors in American history, garnering more than
five hundred patents over the course of his life, most in the field of op-
     tics and photography.
  Long before the appearance of cyber-billionaires like Bill Gates,
"Din" Land, as he was known to friends, was a fabulously wealthy
scientist-cum-capitalist who captured the attention of the nation
through his brilliance and enterprise. Though reclusive — he liked noth-
    ing more than to spend days at a time in his lab, shut off from the outside
world — he could also be a formidable showman for his ideas and prod-
     ucts. His spellbinding performances at Polaroid's annual stockholders
meeting, when Land would unveil a new product with the flair of a
Broadway star, were legendary in the corporate world and attracted ex-
       tensive press coverage. Yet his greatest contribution to the country was
all but unknown to most Americans during his lifetime and even now re-
        mains overshadowed by his achievements in instant photography.
    For better than two decades, beginning in the early 1950s, Land
served as the godfather for a series of technological breakthroughs in
aerial and space-based reconnaissance that transformed the nature of
spying. Through his service as an adviser to five presidents and an equal
number of CIA chiefs, he inspired and guided a remarkably creative
partnership between government, industry, and the academy that gave
the nation new ways of looking behind the Iron Curtain. He spotted
promising technologies, prodded the government to invest in them, and
                          92        Secret      Empire


protected the scientists and engineers who struggled through heart-
              breaking failures to perfect the new machines. When there were prob-
      lems with the state-of-the-art camera systems, Land would roll up his
sleeves and take his place among the engineers to help solve technical
problems. Killian, who brought Land into the inner circle of White
House science advisers, called his Cambridge neighbor and friend "an
authentic genius."
   "His powers of exposition, his facility in expressing complex ideas in
novel, witty, and clarifying ways, can lift a meeting or a report to a
higher level of discourse," Killian said. "He pointed the way to the de-
                velopment ofnew intelligence-gathering technology, such as reconnais-
       sance planes and satellites, that have given unique powers, benign in
their operation, to American intelligence agencies, undergirding policy
decisions of immense consequence and saving the nation billions of dol-

 lars."
   "In meetings with presidents, his eloquence and lucid exposition in-
       cited their latent imagination and prompted them to make decisions and
to undertake leadership roles that had been, until then, beyond their

 reach."
   Richard Garwin, a physicist and government consultant who served
with Land for many years on a CIA advisory board, described Land as
"both a genius and a showman, and an extremely productive and force-
    ful person."
   Bud Wheelon, who came to know Land while directing the scientific
and technological work at the CIA in the mid-1960s, said, "He was be-
        guiling. .. . He had an easygoing kind of charm, but as you listened to
Land you realized that he was saying a series of very profound things.
He could capture one's imagination in a way that was almost spellbind-

 inLater
   g." in his life, Land reflected on his contributions in a conversation
with Killian. As Killian recalled, Land believed that his primary role
"had been to convey to the president and other leaders something of the
humanistic and aesthetic values of science. He took greater pride in this
act of 'teaching' the qualities and values of science than in his immense
   "I Think       I Have     the Plane         You Are After"                  93


technical contributions to the strengthening of our military, intelli-
        gence, and space technology."
   Land made his first mark in optics with his invention of synthetic po-
            larizing filters when he was nineteen years old. He first became fasci-
      nated with the properties of light as a boy growing up in Bridgeport and
Norwich, Connecticut. Land's paternal grandparents, Avram and Ella,
were Russian Jews who emigrated to the United States from their native
Odessa in the 1880s with their two sons, Harry and Sam. Harry, who
took over the family scrap metal business after his father's death, mar-
     ried Martha Goldfaden. Their second child, Edwin, was born in Bridge-
      port on May 7, 1909.
   Like other boys in his neighborhood, Edwin joined the Boy Scouts
and prepared studiously for his bar mitzvah. Unlike the others, he be-
      came intoxicated with the study of light, a subject that enthralled him
for the rest of his life. The idea of polarized light transfixed Land, espe-
       cially the notion of developing a synthetic polarizing material that could
make the beneficial properties of polarized light, including the elimina-
     tion of glare, widely available. A polarizing material works by absorbing
the most intense rays of light while allowing less intense light waves to
pass through it.
  Today, polarizing filters are commonplace. They are used in sun-
       glasses, camera lenses, pocket calculators, and digital watches to remove
glare. If Land's ambitious hopes had been realized, car makers might
also be using polarizing plastic to eliminate the glare from headlights.
But when Land first turned to the field, the polarization of light was lim-
     ited to physics labs and other esoteric uses because there was no conve-
           nient, easily manufactured polarizing material. Land set out to invent it.
He was clearly motivated by a spirit of scientific inquiry as well as a
healthy respect for the potential commercial applications and profits of
a product that might have many uses. Throughout his life, Land worked
with dazzling success at the intersection of science and business.
   Harvard welcomed the putative inventor as a freshman in the fall of
1926, but he found the university confining and left before Christmas.
After a short sojourn in Chicago, where he briefly and unsuccessfully
                         94       Secret      Empire


concentrated on fiction writing, he moved to New York and began in
earnest to study optics and light polarization. He bounced from apart-
       ment to apartment, setting up makeshift labs in basements and back-
            rooms, allthe while reading everything he could find on the subject at
the New York Public Library on 42 nd Street, where he would often sit
all day in the majestic reading room poring over obscure books.
  Previous efforts to make polarizers had relied on growing large crys-
   tals with commonly aligned molecules like those found in natural polar-
       izing materials like calcite or tourmaline. Land experimented with this
approach but found it cumbersome and unsatisfactory. He turned in-
       stead to the opposite solution: producing millions of tiny polarizing
crystals and then arraying them together in low concentration in a clear
sheet of glass or plastic. This sort of about-face in solving a problem,
which Land called "orthogonal thinking," became a hallmark of his in-
       ventive mind.
   Land returned to Harvard in September 1929 and his work on polar-
      izers soon attracted the attention of the physics faculty. The department
set him up with a small lab, an unusual privilege for an undergraduate,
and he developed a productive association with George W. Wheel-
        wright III, a physics instructor who was six years his senior. The teacher
and student hit it off and Wheelwright encouraged Land to pursue his
research interests. In the summer of 1932, Wheelwright suggested that
Land and he set up an independent lab. They rented a room in Cam-
       bridge, then moved to an empty dairy barn in the village of Weston, in
the western suburbs of Boston. The following June, Land's first patent
was approved.
   Over the next two decades, the Land- Wheelwright partnership grew
into a creative research and industrial enterprise, as Land and the small
staff of scientists that he recruited refined the technique for mass pro-
        ducing polarizing material. Land-Wheelwright Laboratories, the firm's
initial name, called the new material Polaroid. In 1937, Land and
Wheelwright folded the lab into a new company that they established
and named the Polaroid Corporation. Wheelwright left the firm in
1942.
   During these years of invention and growth, Land developed the in-
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane         You    Are After"              95

stincts and affiliations that helped to make him such a valuable scientific
adviser to Eisenhower and his successors. Land had a searching, open-
minded intelligence that made him receptive to new ideas and inventive
solutions to seemingly insurmountable problems. The network of
friends that he nurtured at Harvard and MIT, including James Killian,
put him in touch with some of the top scientists in the nation. His asso-
        ciation with Kodak and other industrial companies — and the work of his
own company — schooled him in the practices and creative potential of
the private sector.
   Polaroid^ wartime projects for the government included the produc-
     tion of glare-reducing goggles and gun sights and the development of
sophisticated range finders, periscopes, and bombsights. As the war
came to a close, Land helped Vannevar Bush draft a report for Franklin
Roosevelt on the postwar role science could play in American life. Bush,
an electrical engineer who developed the first electronic analog com-
      puter and had taught at MIT, served as Roosevelt's main science adviser
and headed the Office of Scientific Research and Development, which
coordinated wartime research in the United States. The report called
for the creation of an independent agency that would allocate federal
money for basic research. The recommendation eventually led to the
formation of the National Science Foundation in 1950.
  The war left Land committed to doing whatever he could to improve
the nation's military technology and introduced him to government
leaders in Washington. Land's instruction in reconnaissance issues in-
          tensified with his service in the Beacon Hill group and with his appoint-
      ment in 1951 to the Air Force's Scientific Advisory Board, which was
headed by Theodore von Karman of Caltech, and later his membership
on Jim Baker's Intelligence Systems Panel.
   By the time Killian invited Land to join his landmark technological
study team in 1954, Land was by training and intuition the ideal person
to guide the nation into a new era of overhead reconnaissance. In a fate-
   ful accident of history, Killian's first choice for the chairmanship of the
subcommittee on intelligence, Bruce S. Old of Arthur D. Little Inc., the
Boston think tank, could not arrange a leave of absence. Killian, who
had already named Land to the steering committee for the study, asked
                         96       Secret      Empire


his friend to head the intelligence subgroup. Land accepted, making
clear his intention to keep the group small enough to "fit into a taxicab."
He quickly extricated himself from the project he was working on with
Alfred Hitchcock to produce 3-D movies, and moved back east from
Hollywood, where he had temporarily set up shop.
   As Land, who was forty-five years old, packed up his belongings in
Hollywood, he decided to limit the intelligence panel to six members,
including himself. (Taxis in those days came with jumper seats in the
back and could accommodate five passengers plus the driver.) He
wanted to move briskly and decisively and knew that the larger the
group got the less agile it would be. Drawing on his network of friends
in science and industry, Land assembled an erudite group. The mem-
     bers were Jim Baker; Edward Purcell, the Harvard physicist and Nobel
laureate; John W. Tukey, a Princeton mathematician; Joseph W. Ken-
       nedy, a chemist at Washington University, and Allan Latham Jr., a for-
     mer colleague at Polaroid.
  Land worked the panel hard, arranging frequent meetings with gov-
        ernment officials, but also encouraged open, freewheeling discussions
among the members. Land's style was to work late into the evening, a
habit that shaped the schedule of many of the consulting groups he di-
        rected over the years. Richard Garwin, who got to know Land well
when they served together on a science advisory panel in the 1 960s and
1970s, described the long evenings. "Sometimes we would hold our
meetings at a contractor's facility, and sometimes in the magnificent
board room at Polaroid, where Land's cook would provide us with din-
     ner. Once, a Land Panel meeting did not adjourn until dawn. That was
unusual, but it was not unusual to work until midnight, and then to be
invited to Din Land's personal laboratory for a half-hour demonstration
of his latest work in color vision."
   Land guided the intelligence subcommittee of the Technological Ca-
          pabilities Panel with the same sense of curiosity and determination that
shaped his scientific work, pushing the group to look over the horizon at
new technologies that might transform the intelligence business. Sid-
    ney Drell, a Stanford physicist who later served with Land on a CIA
consulting committee and played a central role in advising the govern-
  "I Think      I Have    the Plane       You Are After"               97

ment on technical intelligence projects, found Land to be a natural
leader. "He exuded confidence and intelligence," Drell said. "He was a
good listener and didn't talk much, but when he did say something, it
was usually significant. Meetings were loose and free and he let the

imagination roam."
   Dick Leghorn, who came to know Land through their intersecting
interest in reconnaissance technology, said that Land enjoyed working
with the government's most secret intelligence projects and budgets —
the black programs, as they are known in Washington. "He loved the
black world," Leghorn said. "Land sensed he could get things done. He
would listen, then go off and get things done."
   Purcell had a similar impression. Land "knew more secrets than the
rest of us did," Purcell told Land's biographer, Victor K. McElheny.
Purcell found Land to be very effective "not so much for his technical
advice but for his ability to convey in a personal way the relative impor-
       tance of the things we were talking about. And his boldness, which, of
course, was part of his business career: talking about what you really
could do if you wanted to."
   Land's broad vision about the nation's intelligence needs set him
apart from most of the government officials and businessmen who were
working on various espionage projects. They tended to focus more
closely on particular issues that directly affected their companies or
agencies. Land always seemed to have a bigger picture in mind. John
McMahon, who served at the CIA for more than a quarter of a century
and came to know Land well, thought of him as an architect. "He had
the master plan of all that had to be done and how to go about it,"
McMahon said. "And he had the political instincts of how to play it in
Washington. He understood Washington very well. His knowledge of
people in the scientific world, particularly around the Washington sec-
     tor, was second to none. Everybody respected him."
   As part of a presidential panel, Land's group had full access to the
nation's intelligence secrets and any officials the members wished to see
at the Pentagon, CIA, and other agencies. The men were not impressed
by what they found. "We would go in and interview generals and admi-
    rals in charge on intelligence and come away worried," Land told Don
                         98       Secret      Empire


Welzenbach, a CIA historian, in 1984. "Here we were, five or six young
men, asking questions that these high-ranking officers couldn't answer."
The CIA did not fare any better.
   Land and his panel members knew from the beginning that the first
defense against surprise attack was improved intelligence information
about Soviet military forces. Their assignment was to identify weak-
       nesses inthe nation's spy operations and to recommend remedies, espe-
      cially innovative technologies. They concentrated on the core question
of whether the United States would be able to detect signs of an im-
         pending Soviet attack — "strategic warning," in intelligence parlance. In
the case of an air attack, early indicators could include the transfer of
Soviet bombers to bases along the northern periphery of the Soviet
Union within striking range of the United States; the movement of nu-
     clear bombs, aviation fuel, and air crews to these staging airfields; inten-
      sified training exercises and the mobilization of other military forces,
among other signs.
  The Land group also wanted to know whether the United States had
a good enough picture of Soviet military forces and industrial produc-
     tion to make long-term assessments of Soviet power and how Washing-
    ton might best marshal American resources to combat the Soviet threat
while simultaneously addressing domestic needs. In its report to Eisen-
        hower, the panel aptly summarized the critical importance of such in-
             formation. "Ifintelligence can uncover a new military threat, we may
take steps to meet it. If intelligence can reveal an opponent's specific
weakness, we may prepare to exploit it. With good intelligence we can
avoid wasting our resources by arming for the wrong danger or at the

wrong time."
  Land and Baker and some of the other members knew from past con-
       sulting work with the Pentagon that American spying was severely
handicapped by the closed nature of Soviet society, the vastness of the
Soviet landmass, and a lack of American intelligence-gathering systems
that could overcome these obstacles. As the men examined the full
range of American espionage programs and the estimates of Soviet mil-
     itary forces that the CIA was churning out, they realized just how little
Washington really knew about current Soviet military programs and ac-
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane       You    Are After"              99

tivities, let alone future ones. In a sobering statement that reverberated
through the top levels of the government when the panel submitted its
report in February 1955, Land and his team said, "We conclude that
there is a real possibility that a surprise attack might strike us without
useful, strategic early warning."
   "We must find ways," the report said, "to increase the number of hard
facts upon which our intelligence estimates are based, in order to pro-
      vide better strategic warning, to minimize surprise in the kind of attack,
and to reduce the danger of gross overestimation or gross underestima-
      tion of the threat." Looking ahead, the Land group suggested immedi-
    ate gains were possible. "We envision as attainable in the near future a
great increase in the usefulness of science in intelligence. Revolutionary
new techniques will be devised to give us facts and answers instead of as-
             sumptions and estimates."
  As soon as Edwin Land saw Kelly Johnson's drawing and perfor-
       mance expectations for the CL-282 in mid-August of 1954, he realized
Lockheed had the makings of exactly that kind of revolutionary new
technique. If the aircraft would fly as high as Johnson promised, and
could be equipped with an equally revolutionary camera system, Wash-
       ington might finally be able to get an accurate reading on Soviet military
power, especially Moscow's new jet-powered Bison bombers. Using his
piece of the Killian committee as both brain trust and battering ram for
the CL-282, Land set to work to get the plane approved and built.
   A new reconnaissance plane would only be as good as the camera it
carried aloft, and no one in the country was better at fashioning new
lenses than Baker. Baker agreed to start work immediately on designing
a camera and lens system that would provide clear, detailed photographs
from an altitude of 70,000 feet. This was no mean challenge. If Land
could secure approval to produce the CL-282, Baker would have to
work fast to come up with a camera system to match.
  At the end of August, in a bold move to try to find an institutional
sponsor for the project, Land turned to the CIA. The Agency was not an
obvious choice. Although its business was collecting and analyzing in-
          telligence information, mostly about the Soviet Union, and engaging in
covert activities abroad, the CIA had little expertise in developing ad-
                        100        Secret      Empire


vanced technologies and designing or building airplanes. Its new direc-
    tor, Allen Dulles, appointed by Eisenhower in 1953, was the consum-
       mate spy, having perfected the black arts of espionage during World
War II as the chief American agent in neutral Switzerland. His brother,
John Foster Dulles, was Eisenhower's secretary of State. Allen Dulles
had little inclination to push the CIA into a realm of technical spying
that he thought was properly the domain of the Pentagon.
   Land's contact point at the CIA was Richard Bissell. Land could have
approached any number of more senior officials at the Agency, includ-
     ing Dulles. But Land, who was careful in choosing allies, must have
heard about Bissell from mutual friends, most likely from Killian. In
1942, Killian had helped recruit Bissell to join the MIT economics fac-
ulty.

   Bissell later said he was puzzled by his conversation with Land, un-
      sure just what the inventor had in mind. But he knew that when a repre-
                 sentative ofthe president came calling, it was wise to show some
interest. In early September, Bissell instructed an Air Force officer on
his staff to review the nation's air reconnaissance programs. A few weeks
later he forwarded the sixteen-page study to Dulles's deputy, Lt. Gen.
Charles Pearre Cabell of the Air Force. In a cover note, Bissell urged
General Cabell to look over the section describing a specialized new air-
     craft proposed by Lockheed.
   Land returned to Cambridge and turned his Polaroid office at 2 Os-
born Street into a nerve center for developing the Lockheed proposal.
His intelligence panel served as the focal point for the discussions,
which extended into the fall and eventually involved representatives
from Lockheed as well as Pratt & Whitney, the jet-engine manufac-
       turer. Land also invited Richard S. Perkin, the president of the Perkin-
Elmer company, a camera manufacturer, and Henry Yutzy, a film expert
from Kodak, to meet with the panel.
   Land was aiming for nothing less than a breakthrough in intelligence:
a new airplane, new camera with new lenses, and new film. He wanted to
turn the operation of the new plane over to the CIA rather than the Air
Force, a step sure to be resisted by the Air Force. He also expected the
 "I Think      I Have    the Plane       You Are After"               101

spy agency to develop sophisticated new methods for examining the
photographs that would be produced. All in all, it was an audacious plan,
one that would work only if Land could gain the cooperation of all the
organizations involved and deflect opposition from the Air Force,
which had been warned that Kelly Johnson's proposal was being revived
by the Land panel. It was not a job that seemed suited to an inventor
most comfortable working in a laboratory, but Land had a steely will
and a taste for bureaucratic combat that surprised his opponents. He
also had the ear of the president.
   As Land gathered the resources he would need to perfect his plan and
sell it to Eisenhower, he first had to talk with Kelly Johnson. Land
arranged a mid-September meeting with Secretary of the Air Force
Harold Talbott. He was accompanied by James Fisk, the deputy director
of the Killian committee. When Land told Talbott of his interest in the
Lockheed aircraft and asked for permission to talk with Johnson, Tal-
      bott said he would consider the request. Land angrily responded, "All
right, Mr. Secretary, I guess we'll have to tell the American people about

 you."
  Talbott weighed the threat for a moment, then picked up the phone
and called Lockheed. "I think Talbott may have had a guilty con-
         science," Land later recalled.
   Once he was free to talk with Johnson, Land had the running room he
needed to draft a comprehensive plan for a new reconnaissance system.
Henry Yutzy from Kodak reported that his company was developing a
Mylar-based film that was much lighter and thinner than traditional
acetate-based film. The weight and thickness of conventional films had
long limited the amount that could be carried aboard reconnaissance
planes. That, in turn, restricted the photographic coverage the planes
could provide. These were particularly sensitive issues for the CL-282
because of the need to keep the plane as light as possible so it could make
extended flights at extremely high altitude. When Yutzy told the Land
panel that Kodak saw little commercial potential for the new film, a sig-
    nal that Kodak was not rushing to complete work on the project, Land
informed him that the national interest compelled the company to pro-
                         102        Secret      Empire


ceed with the research. Kodak speeded up the project, but the new film,
known as Estar, was not ready for use when the Lockheed airplane
began operations.
   Land felt strongly that spy flights over the Soviet Union should not
be conducted by the Air Force. Flights by uniformed pilots in an armed
military aircraft would be more threatening to Moscow, and more likely
to draw fire, than the appearance of an unarmed aircraft commanded by
a civilian pilot. Land, like Eisenhower, worried that military incursions
into Soviet airspace could start a war. In Land's plan, the CL-282 would
be an unmarked plane flown by a civilian working for the CIA. In fact,
he planned to turn the entire project over to the Agency.
   By late October, Land was ready to present his plan to the CIA and
the Air Force. He and his fellow panel members met at the CIA's head-
             quarters inWashington with Allen Dulles and Trevor Gardner. Gard-
    ner was primed to support the idea. Dulles was another matter. He was
dubious about taking on a military mission, not to mention the difficult
technical assignment of managing the construction of the plane. He
shared none of Land's native enthusiasm for research challenges nor his
vision of the CIA as a generator and user of new technologies. Dulles
was noncommittal. Land was frustrated by Dulles's passivity. "We knew
we could get pictures of those Russian bombers," he later told Don
Welzenbach, the CIA historian.
  At this point, Land and Killian quietly went to see Eisenhower to lay
the groundwork for submission of a formal proposal. The Killian com-
          mittee wasn't ready yet to issue its report, but the two men believed that
the CL-282, equipped with a state-of-the-art camera system, could pro-
      vide the country with critically needed information about the Soviet
military threat. They wanted Washington to have use of the plane as
soon as possible.
   The visit by Killian and Land to the White House in late October was
not recorded on the president's official schedule, and the precise date of
the meeting is not clear, but both Killian and Land later described it to
Welzenbach. Gen. Andrew Goodpaster, Eisenhower's staff secretary
and his gatekeeper on these secret programs, recalled that it was not un-
      usual for the president to meet privately with Killian and Land on mat-
  "I Think     I Have     the Plane       You   Are After"             103

ters of great sensitivity. He also said it was common for Eisenhower to
give preliminary approval for an especially important plan well ahead
of its formal submission to him by government agencies. This approach
allowed the president to nudge the machinery of government into
action without officials realizing he was involved. "He didn't want his
role to be known," Goodpaster recalled. Eisenhower employed this
behind-the-scenes management style in other areas as well, as Fred I.
Greenstein, a Princeton political scientist, showed in his 1982 book, The
Hidden-Hand Presidency.
   In the case of the CL-282, the idea of lodging the program in the CIA
rather than the Air Force was likely to cause heartburn at the Pentagon,
another reason Eisenhower may have wished to disguise his early in-
            volvement. The private meeting with Killian and Land was itself a
breach of the usual line of command on such an important matter, and
Eisenhower could well have preferred not to let the Pentagon and CIA
know he had relied so heavily on the advice of two private citizens.
   Land came quickly to the point at the White House meeting. "We
told the president we were confident this aircraft could and would find
and photograph the Soviet Union's Bison bomber fleet."
   Killian recounted the Oval Office meeting in his 1977 memoirs:
"Land described the system using an unarmed plane and recommended
that its development be undertaken. After listening to our proposal and
asking many hard questions, Eisenhower approved the development of
the system, but he stipulated that it should be handled in an unconven-
       tional way so that it would not become entangled in the bureaucracy of
the Defense Department or troubled by rivalries among the services."
   The CL-282 was the first tangible proposal to come from the Killian
committee. Eisenhower, who had approved formation of the panel just
three months earlier, was glad to learn the country might soon have use
of a new, less vulnerable spy plane. "The importance of the effort at the
time cannot be overemphasized," Eisenhower noted in his memoirs.
"Our relative position in intelligence, compared to that of the Soviets,
could scarcely have been worse."
   Not long after the meeting with Killian and Land, Eisenhower got a
timely reminder about the perils of lower-altitude spy flights. On Sun-
                       104        Secret     Empire


day, November 7, two Soviet jet fighters shot down an American B-29
photoreconnaissance plane at midday over the northern Japanese island
of Hokkaido. The plane was attacked while on a mapping mission
within sight of the Kurile Islands, which were occupied by the Soviet
Union after World War II. The crew of eleven airmen bailed out of the
crippled plane before it crashed near the town of Kenebetsu. Ten of the
men survived but one was killed. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles
discussed the news with the president on the phone, telling him,
"Whenever the boys go over there, it's deliberate risk. We think the
plane was over Japan, but the Soviets probably think it was over their
territory." Eisenhower, who was scheduled to meet with a group of con-
            gressmen later that day, mused to Dulles that "we would not want to
admit too much" and that he certainly did not plan to concede that
Washington deliberately dispatched reconnaissance planes into Soviet
airspace.
   Land did not cite Eisenhower's support as he continued to try to sell
the project to Dulles and the Air Force. Shortly after meeting with
Eisenhower, Land turned his attention back to Dulles. On November 5,
he sent the CIA director a secret, sternly worded letter making clear his
expectation that Dulles would approve the project — Land was doubtless
emboldened by the encounter with Eisenhower. "Here is the brief re-
      port from our panel telling why we think overflight is urgent and
presently feasible. I am not sure that we have made it clear that we feel
there are many reasons why this activity is appropriate for CIA, always
with Air Force assistance. We told you that this seems to us the kind of
action and technique that is right for the contemporary version of CIA:
a modern and scientific way for an Agency that is always supposed to be
looking, to do its looking. Quite strongly, we feel that you must always
assert your first right to pioneer in scientific techniques for collecting
intelligence — and choosing such partners to assist you as may be
needed. This present opportunity for aerial photography seems to us a
fine place to start."
   The import of this message extended well beyond the proposed spy
plane. Land was proposing a basic change in the CIA's activities. He
wanted the Agency to become a leader in technological innovation.
  "I Think      I Have     the Plane       You Are After"                 105


This was not a role that the Truman administration or Congress had an-
          ticipated for the CIA when they created the organization in 1947, nor
was it one that its initial directors, including Dulles, had encouraged.
Land was challenging Dulles to put his organization at the cutting edge
of scientific research directed at creating new intelligence-gathering
systems. Until this time, the Agency had emphasized more traditional
espionage work and served as a central clearinghouse for intelligence as-
           ses ments. Ihad
                       t   also moved aggressively into running covert activities
abroad, including paramilitary, political, and propaganda operations. It
had not invested much money or energy in science and technology.
  Dulles, who was not averse to expanding the agency's reach or its
budget and was certainly sensitive to presidential pressure, eventually
saw the merit of Land's approach, though he never became an evangeli-
    cal champion of technology. As he read Land's letter, he may not have
appreciated its long-term implications, but he could not have failed to
see that Kelly Johnson's jet-powered glider was headed his way. Land's
forceful lobbying moved Dulles toward acceptance of the project.
   But the Air Force wasn't quite ready to surrender. While Land, Kil-
lian, and Gardner were in Burbank to inspect a mockup of the CL-282
at the Skunk Works on November 9, Major Seaberg at the Wright Air
Development Command was pressing the Air Force to defend the two
projects he backed, the B-57 and the X-16. General Putt scheduled a
meeting for November 18 to consider the different aircraft proposals.
Members of the Killian steering committee were invited, including
Land and Fisk. When Land learned of the meeting, he summoned sev-
    eral members of his intelligence panel to Washington to be sure they
were in agreement about the advantages of the CL-282. He asked Allen
Donovan, whose expertise on aeronautical matters was unquestioned,
to come down from Cornell to discuss the CL-282 with the panel mem-
     bers the day before the Pentagon meeting.
   Land's goal of fitting everyone into a taxi proved to be prophetic, or
close to it. To keep the discussion confidential, Land arranged for every-
     one to assemble in a car. It was a chilly, rainy day. As Donovan ap-
              proached the Old Executive Office Building on Pennsylvania Avenue,
John Tukey called to him from a four-door Ford sedan that was waiting
                      106        Secret     Empire


at the curb. Tukey was driving. Donovan opened the door to discover
Land, Baker, Purcell, and Fisk sardined in the vehicle. They spent two
hours driving around Washington as Donovan patiently reviewed the
reasons why the CL-282 offered the best chance of penetrating Soviet
airspace.
   On November 18, Land, Fisk, and other members of the Killian
committee met with General Putt, Major Seaberg, and a number of
other Air Force officials. Land and the scientists made it clear they pre-
       ferred the Lockheed plane. Whether General Putt and his Air Force
colleagues realized by this time that Eisenhower favored the CL-282 is
not clear. But everyone in the room knew that Land and the other mem-
     bers of the Killian group had been appointed by Eisenhower to study
the nation's defenses. They were not to be denied.
   Kelly Johnson arrived in Washington that afternoon, summoned by
Trevor Gardner, who realized a decision point was rapidly approaching.
"They wanted to be reassured that our proposal was technically feasi-
     ble," Johnson noted in his diary. Gardner and his allies carefully went
over the details with Johnson, who recalled in his memoirs that "they
put me through a grilling as I had not had since college exams."
   The next day Air Force Secretary Talbott hosted a lunch at the Pen-
       tagon to review the bidding about the aircraft. The guests included
Land, Johnson, Gardner, Dulles, General Cabell, the deputy director of
the CIA, and General Putt. The Air Force bowed to Land's enthusiasm
for the project though the service remained doubtful about the project,
and resentful that the CIA seemed likely to be given lead responsibility
for building and operating the plane. Cabell wrote a memo for the
record. Everyone at the lunch, he said, had agreed "that the special item
of material described by Lockheed was practical and desirable and
would be sought." The money would be drawn from secret accounts
that were not subject to normal government audits.
   Johnson immediately flew back to Burbank and met that evening with
Lockheed's top executives. They approved his brash suggestion that the
Skunk Works build not just a prototype of the aircraft but the full fleet
of thirty planes. The decision transformed Johnson's small experimen-
  "I Think       I Have     the Plane         You Are After"                   107


tal design and engineering operation into an aircraft manufacturing en-
terprise.
  Johnson set to work redesigning several features of the plane, substi-
      tuting aPratt & Whitney engine, as the Air Force had suggested, and
dropping the landing skis he had originally planned in favor of a light-
            weight bicycle-type landing gear. He also expanded the size of the cam-
    era bay. Even so, the dimensions would be a source of contention among
Johnson, Land, and Jim Baker, with Johnson trying to save space and
Land and Baker pressing to expand the compartment to accommodate a
larger camera.
   On Monday afternoon, November 22, Dulles visited the Oval Office
to review the decision with Eisenhower. Ann Whitman, the president's
secretary, recorded in her diary, "Discussion of advisability of going
ahead with new photographic reconnaissance plane at some consider-
     able cost." The next day, the Intelligence Advisory Committee, an in-
                teragency group that helped set intelligence policy, approved a formal
request from Dulles to build the plane. Early on November 24, the day
before Thanksgiving, Dulles signed a three-page memorandum to
Eisenhower seeking official permission to move ahead with the project.
At 8:15 a.m., Dulles and General Cabell joined Air Force Secretary Tal-
bott; Gen. Nathan Twining, the air force chief of staff; General Putt;
Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson; and Secretary of State John Fos-
   ter Dulles at the White House for a meeting with Eisenhower.
  With Eisenhower due to take off that afternoon with his wife, Mamie,
for a weekend of golfing at the Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia,
the conversation moved briskly. John Foster Dulles, anticipating that
the high-altitude spy flights might provoke problems with the Soviet
Union, predicted that difficulties might arise but that "we could live
through them." The meeting lasted just fifteen minutes.
  Eisenhower made it clear to everyone that he expected the CIA to di-
    rect the project with assistance from the Air Force, and that he did not
want the planes or pilots to be part of the U.S. military. General Twin-
    ing was not pleased with the decision. Though the meeting was not the
occasion to express his doubts, he believed, as he later said, that Dulles
                       108       Secret     Empire


and his men were getting "too big for their britches. They did not know
how to handle this kind of operation."
   The idea of sending American reconnaissance planes deep into Soviet
airspace was filled with risk and uncertainty, no matter how technologi-
      cally advanced the aircraft might be. The ramifications were clearly on
Eisenhower's mind a few hours later when he met with William Know-
land, the Senate Republican leader. The California conservative was a
frequent critic of Eisenhower's handling of foreign affairs, and after the
Soviet attack on the American plane over Japan earlier in the month, he
had called for severing diplomatic relations with Moscow.
   Hoping to make clear to Knowland that his administration was not
reacting passively to Soviet pressures, Eisenhower broadly hinted at the
steps he was taking to track Moscow's military activities. The conversa-
     tion was picked up by a tape recorder that Eisenhower activated before
Knowland's arrival. Eisenhower told his visitor that "there is a very
great aggressiveness on our side that you have not known about ... in
the way of reconnaissance and a great many things we are very active
and there are a great many risky decisions on my part constantly ..."
   The Friday following Thanksgiving, Dulles invited Bissell to his of-
     fice and informed him that Eisenhower had approved a secret project to
produce a new reconnaissance aircraft. The CIA was to manage the
project and operate the planes once they were built. Dulles told his star-
      tled aide that the Agency was turning the project over to him. He
handed Bissell a packet of papers and told him to read them over the
weekend. The next week Bissell attended a meeting in Gardner's office
at the Pentagon to organize the work with the Air Force. Bissell, Gard-
     ner, General Putt, and other officials agreed that the CIA would handle
security for the project, oversee the work at Lockheed, and set up a se-
      cret airfield in the western United States where the planes could be
tested and pilots trained. The Air Force would play a major role as well.
It would divert Pratt & Whitney J5 7 engines to Lockheed for use in the
new planes, train the pilots, assign top officers to help Bissell manage
the program, support operations overseas, and provide other technical
and logistical assistance.
  When     the discussion turned to financing questions, specifically
  "I Think      I Have     the Plane       You    Are After"              109


which agency was going to pay Lockheed for the airplanes (not includ-
    ing the engines and camera systems), Bissell realized everyone around
the table was looking at him. "I got the point pretty quickly and said I
would recommend to Dulles that funding for the project be provided
from the C.I.A.'s contingency reserve." The reserve, which was used for
covert activities, was replenished periodically by Congress, and expen-
         ditures from it had to be authorized in advance by the director of the
Bureau of the Budget and approved by the president, but the account
was not subject to the same scrutiny as other Executive Branch budgets.
No written record of an expenditure, for example, was required. The
arrangements allowed for quickness and flexibility and ensured greater
secrecy, but also created opportunities for misuse that the CIA would
exploit in future years to pay for questionable programs in other areas.
   The project was code-named Aquatone. On December 1, Bissell gave
Johnson verbal approval to move ahead with the project. Johnson hoped
to get the first plane into the air by summertime. One of the most auda-
       cious aircraft and intelligence projects of the century was finally under
way.
          PART   TWO




A New Spy Plane Takes Flight
         1954-1956
                           CHAPTER           SIX




            The Role of a Lifetime

Richard M. Bissell Jr., who was forty-five years old when he
      took charge of what became the U-2 program, had never built an
airplane before, and knew little about engineering and reconnaissance
technology. But he had played a key role in managing two highly com-
     plex and important projects. During World War II, he had helped to di-
      rect the movement of American supply convoys across the Atlantic.
After the war, he ran the day-to-day operations of the Marshall Plan, the
American aid program in Western Europe. He was an exceptionally
quick study and an effective executive who liked to move fast, delegate
responsibility, and dispense with the paperwork and stratified decision-
          making that hobbled most federal agencies. He also didn't mind taking
risks. Bissell proved to be an inspired choice to carry the CL-282 and its
new camera and film system from the drawing boards to the skies over
Moscow.
  Bissell, who died in 1994, was a giant of the cold war, a man both
admired and vilified for his work at the vortex of the conflict. Mostly,
he is remembered as the eccentric mastermind of the failed 1961 Bay
of Pigs invasion of Cuba, a misadventure that humiliated John F.
Kennedy within months of his inauguration and swiftly led to BisselPs
inglorious departure from the CIA. As chief of the Agency's covert
operations from 1959 to 1962, Bissell was also the sponsor of some of
the CIA's most cold-blooded — and boneheaded — overseas plots, in-
        cluding aseries of bizarre assassination schemes against Fidel Castro,
the Cuban leader.
  Along with other early leaders of the spy organization, Bissell person -
                                     113
                        114        Secret      Empire


ified a blend of aristocratic idealism and arrogance that gave the CIA an
enduring image as an agency where zealotry often substituted for sound
judgment. Bissell's enthusiasm for clandestine activities of dubious
character and purpose has understandably figured prominently in ac-
        counts ofhis role in the cold war. He and his compatriots tolerated a
chilling disregard for democratic principles in many of the Agency's op-
          erations that cannot be excused by the exigencies of the cold war. They
failed to recognize that the United States might damage itself if its intel-
        ligence services fought the cold war on Moscow's terms, using assassina-
      tion, military coups, and other cutthroat techniques. They also
underestimated how easily such operations could be bungled or publicly
exposed — to the great embarrassment of the CIA and the United States.
  Bissell wrestled with these issues years later, perhaps troubled by
some of the plots he had condoned and no doubt wounded by the criti-
      cism that shadowed him into retirement. In his memoirs, completed
and published two years after his death by Jonathan E. Lewis and
Frances T Pudlo, Bissell pondered whether the privileged world of elite
boarding schools and Ivy League colleges that produced him and other
CIA officers had somehow tainted the formative years of the Agency.
"This is difficult to answer," he wrote. "Many of us who joined the CIA
did not feel bound in the actions we took as staff members to observe all
the ethical rules that we would have observed and regarded as valid be-
     fore we joined. But in a larger sense, the patriotism, the belief in the
need for the United States to play an important role in the world had
some of their roots in our upbringing and education, and they certainly
did affect the atmosphere in the agency."
   It's a frustratingly brief and incomplete answer from a man whose
private papers even now remain shielded from public examination by his
family and friends.
   Because of the controversies about covert operations, and the secrecy
that long shrouded the full story of the development of the U-2 and the
Corona spy satellite, Bissell — and the CIA — have not received the pub-
    lic recognition they deserve for building the overhead spy machines that
helped America manage and ultimately win the cold war. The compact
organizations that Bissell put together to oversee the creation of revolu-
               The Role of a Lifetime                    115


tionary new reconnaissance systems were models of crisp, bureaucratic-
free management, unlike so many of today's cumbersome government
programs. The absence of congressional oversight of the CIA in the
1950s gave him plenty of running room to handle the projects as he
pleased.
   Bissell, an economist by training, was drawn to the intelligence arena
by a combination of social connections, the allure of serving on the
front lines of the cold war, and the formidable power of his intellect.
He came from an upper-class Connecticut family. His English ancestors
first settled in the New World in the seventeenth century in Windsor,
Connecticut, not far from Hartford, and one early family member,
Sgt. Daniel Bissell, served as a spy for Gen. George Washing-
      ton. BisselPs grandfather, who lived most of his life in Chicago, and
BisselFs father, who brought the family back to Connecticut, enjoyed
stable, prosperous careers in the insurance industry, both at the Hart-
      ford Fire Company. His father served as president of the company for
twenty-five years. His mother, Marie, the daughter of a Midwest rail-
      road executive, was a beautiful, flamboyant woman whose iconoclastic
interests and zest for adventure clearly inspired her son. She favored a
yellow roadster — not exactly the typical car of a Hartford society ma-
     tron— enjoyed lively parties, and defied convention by producing a
Gertrude Stein play.
   Bissell, the youngest of three children, was born on September 18,
1909, in the Mark Twain House on Farmington Avenue in Hartford, a
rambling Victorian mansion that Samuel Clemens built and used as his
home while residing in the Connecticut capital. It was home to Bissell
for nine years. The family summered on the Maine coast, usually in a
rented house in Dark Harbor, a settlement on Isleboro, one of the is-
        lands in Penobscot Bay. During these summer sojourns, Bissell devel-
       oped a passion for sailing that was to endure throughout his life. His
mother was his instructor and companion as he learned to handle a
small sailboat in the unforgiving waters along the Maine coast, where
the tides are strong and the weather unpredictable. Marie was not averse
to taking risks as she trimmed the sails and steered the boat close to the
wind for maximum speed.
                         116        Secret      Empire


   In later years, Bissell often turned to the sea for relief from the ten-
      sions ofWashington, heading out in the Sea Witch, his 57-foot yawl. "I
had many scrapes aboard her," he told Evan Thomas, a biographer, "but
no matter how scary, they were better than the bureaucratic fights."
Though he spent his workdays directing the development of state-of-
the-art technology, the Sea Witch lacked such basic navigational instru-
        ments as radar and sonar. Bissell relished the dangers of navigating by
the sound of bell buoys in the fog at night. Critics of the CIA's reckless
covert operations might have found his hazardous habits at sea an apt
analogy for his leadership at the Agency.
   As a boy, Bissell was gangly and unathletic. He suffered from severely
crossed eyes, a problem not corrected by surgery until he was eight.
When he enrolled at Groton, one of New England's elite prep schools,
he found himself an outcast, beset by bouts of homesickness. He re-
          treated to the library and the world of the mind, forging lifetime friend-
     ships with other loners at the school, including Joseph Alsop, who went
on to become one of Washington's most influential conservative pun-
     dits, and Louis Auchincloss, a gifted novelist and chronicler of high so-
       ciety. From Groton, he moved to Yale, where he majored in history.
  After graduating from Yale in 1932, Bissell spent a year in Britain,
studying at the London School of Economics. Impressed by the Keynes-
ian theories taught at the school, he returned to Yale to pursue graduate
studies in economics as a believer in government intervention in the
economy. He also shed his inherited allegiance to the Republican Party,
becoming a Democrat and supporter of Franklin Roosevelt. Bissell de-
        veloped and taught the first course in Keynesian economics at Yale, a
popular undergraduate class that attracted another cluster of students
who would eventually hold powerful jobs in Washington, including the
Bundy brothers, McGeorge and William. McGeorge Bundy served as
John Kennedy's national security adviser. William Bundy was an intelli-
        gence analyst at the CIA in the early 1950s and, as an assistant secretary
of state in the Johnson years, one of the architects of the Vietnam War.
   Bissell collected a Ph.D. in economics from Yale in 1939, after dictat-
     ing his thesis on the theory of capital at the blistering rate of twenty
                  The     Role     of a Lifetime                  117


pages a day, and helped organize the America First Committee at the
university to oppose American involvement in the intensifying Euro-
     pean conflict. "Although I did not like the Nazi ideology, I felt it posed
no invasionary threat to the United States and it did not seem to me suf-
                ficiently upsetting to justify going to war. I thought the country's most
important goals should be economic." By early 1941, he was reconsider-
    ing his views and gladly accepted an offer to move to Washington in Oc-
          tober 1941 to join the Commerce Department for a year.
   The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, altered
his plans. Within weeks he was recruited to help organize the shipment
of munitions and other cargo for American military forces overseas. He
was soon assigned to the War Shipping Administration, the Washing-
    ton agency charged with managing the American merchant fleet. Bissell
was asked to develop a forecasting system that could accurately predict
when ships would be available at American and foreign ports to pick up
war supplies. This was long before the age of computers. Working with
a staff of four aides and card files that listed every available ship, he man-
       aged to produce forecasts three months in advance that were 95 percent
accurate. It was clear that Bissell had a knack for government work and
an ability to handle complex and important assignments.
   The job also gave Bissell a taste of high-powered statecraft. He was a
staff aide on the American delegation to the Yalta Conference in Febru-
      ary 1945, where Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin discussed postwar
spheres of influence in Europe. Bissell also attended the Potsdam Con-
        ference outside Berlin that summer. By then, the war in Europe was
over and he came away from the uneasy talks between Truman and
Stalin convinced that the wartime alliance between Washington and
Moscow was disintegrating.
   For the next year or so, Bissell worked at the Office of War Mobiliza-
     tion and Reconversion and the Office of Economic Stabilization as the
Truman administration struggled to reconvert the American economy
to peacetime conditions. He and his wife had settled in Georgetown,
where they moved easily in a social circle that included several men who
were destined to play leading roles in the CIA, including Frank Wisner,
                        118        Secret      Empire


who became the Agency's first chief of covert operations, and Sherman
Kent, the preeminent intelligence analyst of Soviet affairs. Bissell also
developed friendships with Desmond Fitzgerald and Tracy Barnes, two
other early satraps at the Agency. Still, he was eager to return to aca-
       demic life. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology had held open a
position for Bissell in its economics department since 1 942 . He and his
family moved to Cambridge in September 1946.
  He didn't stay for long. A call in July 1 947 from Averell Harriman,
Truman's secretary of commerce and the heir to the Union Pacific Rail-
     road fortune, drew Bissell into a central role in the administration of the

Marshall Plan. He described the period in his memoirs as "perhaps the
most worthwhile years of my career," a statement that seemed to reflect
both his genuine enthusiasm about the Marshall Plan and some ambiva-
      lence about his later work for the CIA. BisselPs job, during the fall of
1947, was to direct the preparation of a report by a committee of promi-
      nent Americans on the merits of a European aid program. The commit-
     tee, headed by Harriman, who had served as ambassador to the Soviet
Union during World War II, helped galvanize public and congressional
support for the recovery plan, which had been proposed by Secretary of
State George Marshall. Once Congress approved the Marshall Plan in
April 1948, Bissell was summoned back to Washington again, this time
to help run the Economic Cooperation Administration, the new gov-
           ernment agency created by Congress to distribute the assistance and see
that it was used constructively.
   The post placed Bissell at the controls of what was certainly one of
the most generous and enlightened programs by any country since the
formation of the first nation-states. The United States, of course, was
looking after its own interests by helping Europe recover from the war
with an infusion of $13.3 billion over four years, the equivalent of more
than $99 billion in today's dollars. The continent's economic desolation
invited political unrest and provided fertile conditions for the spread of
Communism. The future security and prosperity of the United States
clearly depended in no small measure on the reconstruction of Europe,
including the revival of free markets and the restoration of stable, dem-
        ocratic governments. By those standards, the Marshall Plan was a re-
                The    Role    of a Lifetime              119


markably farsighted and effective act of self-interest. But on a more
human scale, it was also a compassionate program that helped millions
of destitute people rebuild their lives, businesses, and neighborhoods.
  It's easy to see how Bissell moved easily from one method of combat-
    ing Communism to another. The Marshall Plan was America's overt
program to prevent the Soviet Union from extending its influence into
Western Europe. The CIA ran clandestine activities with the same goal.
Indeed, the degree of separation seemed so slight to Bissell that his ini-
       tiation inthe spy game came while he was at the Marshall Plan. In 1949,
he diverted money from the Economic Cooperation Administration to
support Washington's intelligence activities in Europe. The request,
not surprisingly, came from Frank Wisner, who was then head of the
Office of Policy Coordination, the blandly named State Department
agency that was responsible for covert activities before they were trans-
       ferred to the CIA. Wisner informed Bissell that Harriman had approved
the transfer.

   Bissell's recollection of the encounter with Wisner nicely captures
the mingling of business and social connections that helped propel Bis-
     sell into the CIA a few years later. "Although I don't remember having
had any previous contact with him on official business, I had met him
socially and knew and trusted him because of mutual friends like Joe
Alsop." The funds came from matching contributions that European
countries made to the Marshall Plan in their national currency. Accord-
    ing to Bissell, nearly all the European money — 95 percent of it— was
used for reconstruction. The remaining 5 percent went into a fund to
help pay the administrative costs of the plan. Bissell dipped into that ac-
       count for Wisner. He speculated, probably correctly, that some of the
money that he gave Wisner may have found its way to the same political
parties and labor unions that were already benefiting more directly from
the Marshall Plan.

  It wasn't long before Bissell himself migrated to the CIA. In early
1952, as the Marshall Plan wound down, Bissell accepted a job offer
from the Ford Foundation, which was headed by Paul Hoffman, the
former director of the Economic Cooperation Administration. Bissell's
arrangement with the foundation allowed him to do consulting jobs on
                        120         Secret      Empire


the side, and he soon started advising the CIA on various issues, meeting
periodically at Princeton University with other Agency consultants.
   Through the Marshall Plan, he had met Eleanor Dulles, who worked
at the German desk at the State Department. She was the sister of Allen
Dulles and John Foster Dulles, who would soon become Eisenhower's
secretary of state. Eleanor Dulles, in turn, had introduced Bissell to her
brothers. By late 1953, Allen Dulles was pressing Bissell to come work
full time for the CIA. The Georgetown dinner circuit gave them the
perfect opportunity to talk. "One evening at a fairly large dinner party
hosted by Stewart Alsop," Bissell recalled, "I took Dulles's arm as he was
leaving and mentioned that the special economics project I had been
working on at the Ford Foundation was about to end and I was going to
have to find a new position. He told me to come see him before I com-
        mitted myself otherwise."
   As a rising star in Washington and the academic world, Bissell could
doubtless have had his choice of top government jobs, including a post
at the State Department. But like other men and women considering
government careers in the early 1950s, especially national security jobs,
Bissell had to reckon with the specter of McCarthyism. There was noth-
     ing in his background that would attract suspicion, but he knew that the
witch-hunts were terrorizing government agencies. The State Depart-
      ment was one of the most grievously wounded victims, in large part
because John Foster Dulles had failed to stand his ground against Mc-
           Carthy's attacks on the diplomatic corps, including several of Bissell's
friends. Indeed, the secretary of state had hired one of McCarthy's aides
to investigate subversion at the department. Allen Dulles, by contrast,
refused to let himself be intimidated by McCarthy.
   Bissell signed on with the CIA in February 1954 as special assistant to
Dulles. It was a loosely defined job that quickly exposed him to a variety
of Agency activities, including the successful coup d'etat that the CIA
engineered in Guatemala in the summer of 1954. The removal of Ja-
cobo Arbenz as Guatemala's president was the high-water mark of the
Agency's cold war efforts to rearrange foreign governments to suit
American interests. Bissell helped to direct propaganda operations that
supported the coup, including radio broadcasts and leaflet drops.
                The     Role    of a Lifetime               121


  A year earlier, in August 1953, the CIA had directed a coup in Iran
that replaced a left-leaning leader, Mohammed             Mossadegh, with a
young, pro- Western strongman, Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi. Con-
       fident that such covert operations were an effective way to enhance
American security, the Agency, with Eisenhower's blessing, applied the
same techniques in Guatemala. In both cases, the immediate objec-
    tive— the installation of a leader friendly to America — was attained. But
the cost for both Iran and Guatemala over the ensuing decades was se-
        vere. Guatemala was ruled by a succession of military dictators cynically
supported by the United States. The Shah, though a modernizing force
in Iran in some respects, relied on repression to stifle political dissent
and was overthrown by Islamic fundamentalists in the 1979 revolution
led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
  Bissell came to see the downside himself, though he remained con-
        vinced that toppling foreign leaders in cases like Guatemala was a legit-
       imate exercise of American power. "As to the question of overthrowing
a foreign sovereign government, I would approve the same action today
without hesitation," he noted in his memoirs. "With hindsight, how-
       ever, would
             I      be more cautious in estimating what would happen as a re-
     sult of this kind of intervention and whether it was really in the best
interests of the United States."
   Fresh from his troubleshooting role for Dulles during the Guatemala
operation, and still relatively untested in the spy business, Bissell sud-
       denly found himself running the Agency's most important and urgent
enterprise when Dulles handed him the CL-282 on November 26,
1954. For Bissell, it was the role of a lifetime. The order to build the
plane came directly from the president. In Killian and Land he had
powerful defenders who could ensure that he got the full cooperation of
the Air Force and other agencies. Kelly Johnson was eager to make good
on his promise to rewrite the laws of high-altitude flight and Jim Baker
was already at work on a new camera system. Bissell's job was to syn-
         chronize allthe pieces and to produce a radical new spy plane in record
time — less than eight months.
  Bissell's brief meeting with Dulles on the day after Thanksgiving
abruptly changed his routine. Instead of fielding a variety of assign-
                         122         Secret       Empire


ments from Dulles, most dealing with traditional espionage matters,
Bissell was now running the most technologically advanced project the
CIA had ever tackled. He knew almost nothing about aerodynamic en-
           gineering, aerial navigation, aviation fuels, and the risks associated with
operating a manned aircraft at an altitude of 70,000 feet. Indeed, there
was almost no one at the Agency who had experience in these areas be-
      cause Allen Dulles and his aides had never imagined they might be or-
       dered to build and operate their own elite air force.
    "Because all the discussions had been conducted at such a high level
of the executive branch," Bissell said, "nobody had really worked out
how anything was to be done. Nobody knew where the money was com-
     ing from. Nobody knew how much it would cost. Nobody knew who
would procure the aircraft. Nobody had even given any thought where
it could develop, where flight testing could be done, where people could
be trained or by whom, who would fly it or anything."
   But Bissell did know how to construct and manage an efficient orga-
              nization, and within hours of his conversation with Dulles he was draw-
    ing on his experience in the Marshall Plan and World War II shipping to
build an agile, informal, and largely self-contained outfit. Because the
program was considered so sensitive, Project Aquatone was set up as a
stand-alone operation, with its own office space, staff, security, and even
its own communications systems. The staff, composed of CIA aides and
a contingent of skilled Air Force officers, was initially housed in an
aging building on E Street, not far from the Lincoln Memorial. But the
structure was so rickety that the addition of office machinery made the
floor unstable. Bissell temporarily transferred the operation to sturdier
quarters down the street and eventually moved to a nondescript down-
      town office building, across the street from the Metropolitan Club. For
years, the capital's lawyers, lobbyists, and journalists went about their
business on the 1700 block of H Street N.W. without any inkling that
one of the most secret spy operations of the cold war was headquartered
on the fifth floor of the Matomic Building at 1717 H Street N.W.
   Realizing that the CIA lacked experts to oversee the highly technical
work that would be done by Lockheed, as well as Kodak and the other
subcontractors, Bissell relied heavily on top aides throughout the life of
                 The Role of a Lifetime                      123


the spy-plane program, including a number of officers and civilians as-
       signed to the project by the Air Force. He developed an especially close
and effective partnership with Gen. Osmond Ritland of the Air Force,
who served as the deputy director of the spy-plane project and a later
advanced technology program that Bissell ran. The top management
team included James Cunningham and John Parangosky of the CIA and
Leo Geary, Stanley Beerli, and Gene Kiefer of the Air Force. Bissell also
left many of the details to Kelly Johnson and his industry counterparts.
"I had no technical background for this task and had to learn as I went
along. The technical decisions were pretty largely left to the contractor,
primarily Johnson, and, to a degree, to Pratt & Whitney."
   Though unavoidable, it was still a daring strategy that removed the
CIA from the kind of close supervision that federal agencies preferred,
and it gave private companies wide latitude in how they spent the money
Washington was providing. Duplicating the relationship today would
be all but impossible, given the size of government and corporate bu-
            reaucracies and the congressional oversight requirements that grew out
of a painful history of cost overruns in subsequent defense and intelli-
       gence projects and the history of CIA assassination plots uncovered by
Congress in the 1970s.
  The Bissell approach was unorthodox even by the more relaxed stan-
      dards ofthe 1950s. "There weren't a heck of a lot of rules," recalled Bob
King, a CIA staff member who was assigned to the project as the first
planes were being flight tested in 1955 and later served as BisselPs exec-
      utive officer. The free-wheeling style was vintage Bissell. One day when
he was driving the wrong way down a one-way street in Washington
with his secretary, he told her not to worry. "Why bother with the rule
when there are no cars on the street?" he said.
   This disdain for the rules carried over to the development project.
John McMahon, who worked for Bissell in the late 1950s and went on to
become the nation's second-ranking intelligence official, recalls that
Bissell was impatient with aides who cited government rules that stood
in the way of his plans. "Don't come in and tell me we can't do it," he
would say. "Your job is to use the regulations and laws to permit me to
doit."
                          124         Secret       Empire


   Stan Beerli, who as an Air Force colonel served as one of BisselPs

closest aides, saw the same spirit. "The only regulations we had were the
ones we made up ourselves to get the mission done."
   Bissell also used his temper as a rapier. McMahon remembers attend-
     ing abudget meeting with Bissell where the finance officer fumbled
with his papers and couldn't answer a question. Bissell ordered the aide
out of the room and abruptly ended the meeting.
   Arthur C. Lundahl, who later worked closely with Bissell as the CIA's
chief photo interpreter, found BisselPs methods effective. "He knew
how to get things done," Lundahl recalled. "He knew how to twist arms,
how to cajole, how to influence, how to make people understand prob-
       lems, how to convince people, and he was extremely well informed."
   BisselPs range of interests and expertise sometimes startled col-
             leagues. Lundahl said that late in the evening, after a full day of dealing
with the spy plane, including calls to the White House, Bissell would
suddenly set aside his CIA work and start dictating an economics text-
      book to his secretary.
   Believing that Lockheed "could be trusted not to abuse the govern-
        ment's interest," Bissell did without the usual reporting requirements.
"We kept our regular monthly progress reports to about five, pages," he
recalled, in contrast to the stack of paperwork that the Air Force would
have demanded from Lockheed over the same period.
   The high degree of secrecy surrounding the program eliminated lay-
     ers of decision-making. Though Bissell reported to Dulles and his
deputy, General Cabell, he made most decisions autonomously. "I
worked behind a barrier of secrecy that protected my decision-making
from interference," he said. Normally, copies of all CIA cable traffic
about important matters were sent to the director's office. In this case,
Bissell directed his staff to send Dulles only the cables that seemed to
have policy implications and not to forward communications traffic
about the construction and testing of the new airplane.
   When Bissell was flummoxed by a technical or bureaucratic problem,
he would consult with Land. The two men talked frequently, usually
several times a week. They were an unlikely duo. Bissell was tall and
rumpled, Land short and neat. One came from a family of affluence and
                 The     Role     of a Lifetime                125


social cachet, the other from an immigrant background. Bissell was a
government manager, Land an independent inventor. But they were
both exceedingly smart and shared a powerful desire to help their coun-
    try win the cold war.
   "When things were going bad, Bissell turned to Land," Bob King
said. "Bissell's secretary, Doris, would often tell me when the boss was
upset, 'It's going to be better, he's talking to Land, he's always better
after he talks to him.' "
   Bissell and Kelly Johnson were another unlikely pair. Though they
were both men with combustible tempers who could not have come
from more different backgrounds, they developed a cordial and infor-
    mal working relationship. Bissell told Johnson his expectations were
simple: "When you face a decision, I want to know about it, I want to
pass judgment on it. But I've got to rely on you to tell me the potential
consequences and costs of these decisions."
   The two men did most of their business by phone. Johnson would
sketch out the question or problem to Bissell and after a brief discussion
would get a quick decision. The same curiosity that had drawn Bissell to
the study of complex economic issues propelled him into an intensive
series of tutorials about the technical aspects of the CL-282. He fre-
         quently quizzed Johnson, Land, and Baker as the project proceeded.
Johnson found that Bissell "quickly became very knowledgeable on en-
                gineering matters." Bob King remembers Johnson and Bissell talking in
detail about the tensile strength of titanium in one conversation. "Bis-
     sell loved that stuff," King said.
   Bissell could also be a quirky, difficult boss. He inspired his staff more
by intellectual brilliance than personal warmth. Though his manners
were refined, and he could be charming, Bissell often seemed aloof and
a bit awkward in his interactions with colleagues. "He was a gentleman,"
Bob King said. "But he wasn't much for small talk, especially at work.
There, it was always business."
   Bissell stood well over 6 feet tall and was famous at the Agency for
walking so fast that his aides had to trot alongside to keep up. Despite
the repair work on his crossed eyes when he was young, one eyeball
would sometimes drift out of alignment with the other. Though he
                           126          Secret       Empire


came from an affluent family, his work wardrobe consisted of two or
three dark suits that were perpetually rumpled, and he drove a dilapi-
      dated car.
   He was a restless figure behind his cluttered desk, constantly fidget-
     ing with paper clips or the handkerchief he kept in his pocket. Because
of a chronic sinus problem, he would periodically inhale loudly through
his nose. Aides who were invited to Bissell's spacious home in Cleveland
Park, a woodsy Washington neighborhood where he and his family had
moved in the early 1950s, were astonished by the chaos. Betty King,
Bob King's wife and herself a CIA employee, remembered coming to
Sunday brunch and finding the Bissell family dog tied up to the leg of
the stove and piles of laundry cascading down the staircase. Ann Bissell
served steak and kidney pie, not exactly a Washington favorite.
   For all his eccentricity and awkwardness, Bissell was extremely effec-
     tive at motivating people. The project, of course, sold itself. The tech-
              nology was new. The idea of sending an American plane over the
interior of the Soviet Union was electrifying. But Bissell, brimming
with self-confidence and a writ from the president to sweep away bu-
                  reaucratic impediments, lent the project an air of invincibility that ener-
      gized his staff.
   He also sensed how to get the best work out of Kelly Johnson. Instead
of giving Lockheed technical specifications for the new plane, which
would have consisted of pages of detailed requirements, Bissell and his
aides settled for less precise performance guidelines. That freed John-
     son to follow his creative instincts. An initial letter of agreement be-
          tween the Agency and the company was signed by the end of December
1954. After some negotiation between Johnson and Lawrence R. Hous-
     ton, the CIA's general counsel, Lockheed and the Agency signed a for-
     mal contract on March 22, 1955. It committed the company to deliver
the first of twenty planes in July. The expected cost for the fleet was $22
million. That did not include engines, which the Air Force would pro-
      vide, or the camera equipment, which the CIA would pay for separately.
   Even before the contract was signed, Bissell had started transferring
funds to Lockheed, writing two checks for a total of $1.2 million. To
maintain secrecy, and to keep the payments off the Agency's regular
               The    Role    of a Lifetime              727


books, Bissell made out the checks to a fictitious company. The pay-
        ments were mailed to Johnson's home in Encino, a suburb of Los Ange-
   les. Johnson, in turn, deposited the checks in a local bank account he had
established for the sham company. By early 1955, the CL-282 was tak-
    ing form in the aircraft assembly area at Burbank.
                          CHAPTER             SEVEN




      "This Thing Is Made Out of
             Toilet Paper"

Kelly Johnson had wasted no time gearing up for the project after
   Washington gave its approval. Even before Bissell called Johnson
on December 1, 1954, to confirm that he should proceed with the proj-
     ect, the plane designer had started putting together an engineering
team. On Friday, November 26, the day after Thanksgiving, he had
summoned five of Lockheed's top engineers to his office, including Ed-
     ward Baldwin and Elmer Gath, to tell them about the secret project.
  Ben Rich, who had been working at Lockheed for four years as a ther-
modynamicist, vividly recalled the December day when he was unex-
         pectedly invited to meet with Johnson in Building 82, the old bomber
production hanger that housed the Skunk Works. Rich's specialty was
dealing with the heat problems generated by high-speed flight and re-
       fining the designs for inlet and exhaust ducts on jet engines. One of
Johnson's aides had told Rich he would be moving to Johnson's shop to
help modify engines for a new plane that would make the kind of long-
         distance, high-altitude flights that no aircraft had ever flown.
   Rich found Johnson in shirtsleeves seated behind a large wooden
desk. "This project is so secret," Johnson told him, "that you may have a
six-month to one-year hole in your resume that can never be filled in."
Johnson then described the project. "We are building a very special air-
      plane that will fly at least fifteen thousand feet higher than any Russian
fighter or missile, so it will be able to fly all across Russia, hopefully un-
           detected, and send back beautiful picture postcards for Ike."
                                        128
 "This Thing        Is Made      Out    of Toilet      Paper"          129

   Johnson instructed Rich to get to work on the engine inlets and to
start thinking about cabin heating and cooling as well as hydraulics and
fuel control for the plane. Rich was assigned to a second-floor office oc-
        cupied bysix other engineers. The windows, like those throughout the
hangar, were sealed and blacked-out to ensure security. Nearly everyone
was a smoker, so the air in most offices was a perpetual haze. Rich ex-
        pected to stay for no more than six months. He remained at the Skunk
Works for thirty-six years, and took over the operation in 1975 after
Johnson retired.
   Rich was part of a rapidly expanding team of twenty-five engineers
that Johnson assembled in the days before Christmas. They were soon
working sixty-five hours a week, under strict instructions to tell no one
about their work, including their families. Johnson noted in his log:
"Talked to each man on the project to impress them with the necessity
for speed and secrecy. It is extremely difficult to pull these engineers
from other projects at this time, particularly in that I cannot tell anyone

 why."
   The secrecy extended to all aspects of the project. Parts for the air-
      craft were shipped to another site in the San Fernando Valley that had
no ostensible connections to Lockheed, and Skunk Works employees
were ordered to use aliases when making business trips. If suppliers
raised questions about unusual orders, they received a visit from CIA se-
       curity officers. That happened when executives at the Kollmann Instru-
       ment Company expressed puzzlement about an order for altimeters
calibrated to 80,000 feet. The normal maximum altitude was 45,000
feet. After discussions with the CIA, Kollmann executives responded to
questions about the altimeters by saying they were being built for an ex-
            perimental rocket plane.
  In a creative departure from conventional security practices, the en-
           gineering drawings and other paperwork for the project were not
marked secret, so they would not attract attention if they were seen by
anyone who lacked a clearance to work on the plane.
   The Skunk Works' crew and the subcontractors for the airplane faced
monumental challenges as they struggled to translate Johnson's design
plan into a working aircraft and then put it through test flights. Because
                       130        Secret     Empire


of the high operating altitude set for the plane, nearly every component
had to be specially engineered to perform in the thin air at the fringe of
outer space. Pratt & Whitney, which made the J57 engines, modified
various parts, including the alternator, oil cooler, and hydraulic pump,
for high-altitude operation. Even so, the initial engines proved unreli-
     able in the upper atmosphere when the first operational aircraft were
put through a series of test flights later that year. As pilots made the last
phase of their climb above 57,000 feet, the engines often flamed out
with a loud bang, the aviation equivalent of a car engine stalling. The pi-
     lots called this unpredictable zone of ascent the "badlands" or the "the
chimney." When they lost power, pilots were forced to glide down to
around 3 5,000 feet to restart their engines. That was unnerving enough
during test flights. If it happened over the Soviet Union it would leave
the plane vulnerable to attack as it descended. Pratt & Whitney eventu-
    ally substituted a more powerful and dependable engine in 1956, before
the first flights over the Soviet Union.
   Fuel was another obstacle. At 70,000 feet, normal jet fuel would ei-
     ther boil off or evaporate because of the low air pressure. Johnson had to
get a new fuel formulated and manufactured. He sought help from Gen.
James Doolittle, the retired Air Force commander who in 1955 served
as vice president of Shell Oil Company and was a member of the Killian
commission. Shell produced a low-volatility, low-vapor-pressure kero-
      sene fuel known as LF-1A. It had a boiling point of 300 degrees at
sea level and was so stable that it could not be ignited with a match. The
fuel incorporated a number of petroleum by-products, including several
used in a popular commercial insecticide called Flit. As Shell diverted
the chemicals to the special fuel, it had to curtail production of the bug
spray. Consumers across the country who wondered why there was a
shortage of Flit on store shelves in 1955 had no idea that the cause was a
secret spy-plane project.
   The oil system on the plane presented a different problem. Because
of the low atmospheric pressure at cruising altitude, oil tended to leak
through the seals on the J57 engine, corrupting the cabin air-
conditioning and defogging mechanisms. The leakage could deplete the
entire 64-quart oil supply during a long flight. But even short of such a
  "This Thing        Is Made     Out    of Toilet       Paper"          131

catastrophic outcome, the slow oozing of oil into the defogging system
left the cockpit canopy covered with a film of oil. Before this problem
was solved with the introduction of the new engine in 1956, Johnson
equipped pilots with a diaper cloth attached to a long stick that they
could use to clean the windshield. Another temporary, and unsuccessful,
fix involved splicing a makeshift filter into the defogger line. The filter
consisted of a small metal box stuffed with sanitary napkins.
  Johnson's design called for the lightest possible airframe — the fuse-
     lage, wings, and tail section — to allow for long-distance, high-altitude
flights. Every pound added to the plane's weight would sacrifice a foot in
altitude. Light materials like aluminum were used wherever possible. As
Johnson's crew started to assemble the aircraft, they were startled by the
fragility of the airframe. Workers joked that the plane was made out of
Reynolds Wrap.
   The weight of the elongated wings was kept to 4 pounds per square
foot, a stunningly low figure. Bob Ericson, one of the men who piloted
the plane, couldn't believe how flimsy the wings seemed. He recalled,
"You picked the wing up and it bent, and — holy smokes — you know, this
thing is made out of toilet paper."
   The long, narrow gliderlike wings, designed to give the plane added
lift and to carry enough fuel for extended flights, were the plane's most
distinctive feature, and the most problematic. The wingspan was
roughly 70 feet, exceptionally large for an aircraft that was about 44 feet
long. When Edward Baldwin plotted out the wing design on his draw-
    ing board, following Johnson's commands, he couldn't believe his boss
wanted something so long and thin.
   "Are you sure you want a wing that looks like this?" Baldwin asked
Johnson.
  "That's about right," Johnson replied.
  Baldwin then informed him that his drawing board couldn't accom-
        modate drafting paper large enough to show the full length.
   "Put a little patch of paper up there to show what it looks like," John-
     son said. "Then you'll have to redraw it because the blueprint machine
won't handle anything wider than 42 inches."
   The wings were so long they drooped toward the runway at either
                       132        Secret      Empire


end, and during taxiing and takeoff had to be held up at midwing by
wheeled struts that detached as the aircraft lifted off. These devices

were known as "pogos" at Lockheed. If the pilot failed to trigger their
release properly, or the automatic mechanism that was later added did
not work, the plane was not safe to fly. In one case, the plane stalled as
the pilot circled back to the airstrip to drop a hanging pogo. He was
killed in the crash.
   The wings housed a set of fuel tanks, allowing the plane at full load to
carry 1,350 gallons of the special Shell blend. It was clear to everyone
that air turbulence, especially at lower altitudes where the atmosphere
was heavier, could intensify the natural swaying of the wings to the point
where they might tear free of the fuselage. To reduce this danger, John-
    son set the horizontal stabilizers and ailerons, the wing flaps that control
the rolling and banking movements, so that the plane would fly with its
nose slightly raised, making it less vulnerable to the stresses caused by
wind gusts.
   When Johnson had bowed to Air Force demands that he abandon his
plan to land the plane on its belly rather than on conventional landing
gear, he still hoped to get by with as light a landing system as possible.
His solution was two lightweight wheels at the front of the aircraft and
two smaller wheels beneath the tail. This design worked in tandem with
the pogos to keep the plane level during takeoff, but left the plane prone
to tipping to one side or the other as it slowed down after landing. He
handled this problem by attaching small landing skids to the wingtips.
As the aircraft came to a stop, one wing or the other would tip down
until the skid made contact with the tarmac. It wasn't elegant, but it
worked.
  One of the most daunting challenges facing Johnson and his col-
       leagues was creating a life-sustaining environment for the pilots. The
problem was simple to articulate but difficult to solve: Human beings
die almost instantly at 65,000 feet. There is not enough oxygen to sus-
     tain life. The air temperature is 70 degrees below zero Fahrenheit. And,
as if that weren't enough, the fluids in the human body, including the
blood, vaporize in the low air pressure. Pilots had to be provided with a
life-support system that would not only allow them to operate the air-
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                         133

craft during long flights over Soviet territory, but would also make it
possible for them to survive a sudden decompression and bailout at high
altitude, if the plane malfunctioned or was disabled by Soviet air defense
forces. Johnson needed a reliably pressurized cockpit and oxygen-
breathing system to sustain life over a prolonged flight and a special
pressure suit that would enable a pilot to live through an abrupt decom-
pression.
   These were complementary solutions to the same basic problem,
namely maintaining a safe balance between the pressure inside a human
body and the external pressure around it. If this balance is drastically al-
      tered, the results can be lethal. When external pressure greatly exceeds
internal pressure — conditions that would typically occur deep under
water — an unprotected body can be crushed. At high altitudes, as out-
      side air pressure diminishes and pilots are forced to inhale large
amounts of canned oxygen, the opposite danger develops. In extreme
conditions — like those the CL-282 would routinely encounter — an un-
           protected body would expand or even explode.
   At sea level, of course, the pressure balance is normal and no one
gives the issue much thought. In modern commercial jetliners, cabin
pressure is maintained at about the comfortable equivalent of 8,000 feet
as the plane cruises at 3 5,000 to 40,000 feet. Oxygen is mixed into the air
circulating in the plane, and there is no perceptible change in the pres-
     sure balance inside and outside the bodies of the passengers and crew.
But the stresses involved in operating a high-performance aircraft at
much higher altitudes are not as easily solved. That was especially true
in the early 1950s, when jet planes were still a novelty. The CL-282 was
going to stretch the boundaries of jet flight and human survival at ex-
         tremely high altitudes.
   It was impractical, if not impossible, at the time to design a pressur-
      ized cockpit for the CL-282 that would maintain Denver-like condi-
       tions inside the cabin while the plane was flying at 65,000 feet. Johnson
settled for a cockpit that would mimic the environment at 28,000 feet,
roughly the equivalent of the summit of Mount Everest. At that level,
pilots would require a steady source of pure oxygen for breathing. That
could be provided through a domelike helmet that enclosed the head.
                       134       Secret     Empire


For pilots to be able to inhale enough oxygen, the air pressure inside the
helmet had to be elevated slightly above the norm at sea level. As long as
cabin pressure was maintained at the equivalent of 28,000 feet in alti-
      tude, the additional pressure in the helmet posed no danger because a
pilot's body would not expand in those conditions. But Johnson knew
that if cabin pressure failed when the plane was flying above 50,000 feet,
the pressure equilibrium would be shattered. The air pressure in the
cockpit would plunge and the oxygen flowing into the pilot's helmet
would automatically increase sharply to force the pilot to inhale the
greater amount of oxygen he needed to maintain consciousness. At that
critical point, the pilot's body would become dangerously distended un-
     less itcould be tightly squeezed by a special garment known as a pres-
       sure suit.
  Cabin depressurization would probably happen in an instant, the re-
    sult of a sudden rupture of the cockpit. This potentially deadly event is
known as explosive decompression. A full-pressure suit, when activated,
basically substitutes for a pressurized cabin by enclosing the pilot in a
protective shell that maintains safe air-pressure levels immediately
around the body while leaving enough flexibility of movement to oper-
      ate the aircraft. The most elaborate full-pressure suits today are the
space suits used by astronauts when they operate outside the space shut-
    tle or space station. Less bulky full-pressure suits are commonly used by
military pilots. In 1955, the best Johnson could hope for was a partial-
pressure suit, an awkward garment that simply tightened mechanically
around the limbs and torso of a pilot in an emergency to prevent the
pilot's body from expanding. It was like wearing a jumpsuit that sud-
       denly contracted.
   To deal with these unconventional problems, Lockheed and the CIA
turned to a number of adventurous men who had done groundbreak-
    ing— and in some cases life-risking — work in designing equipment to
sustain life at high altitudes. Several of them went on to play important
support roles in the manned space program that began in earnest in the
late 1950s. Some of the work done for the CIA's first generation of spy
pilots was later adapted for the space suits used by Alan Shepard, John
Glenn, Wally Schirra, and the other Mercury astronauts.
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                         135

   The physical demands of high-altitude flight were broadly recog-
       nized but not fully understood as the prototype CL-282 started to take
shape in Building 82 in Burbank. The perils of ascending into the upper
levels of the atmosphere had been clear since men had first ventured
aloft in balloons in the eighteenth century. Early generations of air-
        planes lacked pressurized cabins. As airplanes were adapted for military
use during World War I, it was customary for pilots to operate at alti-
      tudes between 16,000 and 18,000 feet in open cockpits. Disorientation
from lack of oxygen was common, as was hypothermia from the cold.
The first oxygen systems and heated flight suits were developed for mil-
      itary pilots during the later stages of the war. Further advances came
over the next two decades as pilots sought to fly higher and higher.
   The first widely used pressurized cabin was introduced in 1937 in a
modified Lockheed Model 10 Electra. It allowed crew and passengers to
travel above 30,000 feet in normal clothing without oxygen equipment.
These technologies had advanced far enough by 1954 to make flight at
midrange altitudes fairly routine. Hal Austin and other Strategic Air
Command fliers, for example, operated routinely above 40,000 feet in
the pressurized cabins of their state-of-the-art bombers and reconnais-
       sance planes.
   But Kelly Johnson wanted to take the technology to an entirely new
level. He needed not only to keep pilots alive while flying above 65,000
feet for eight to ten hours, but also to come up with a way to ensure their
survival if they had to bail out of the plane at that altitude and descend to
earth by parachute. Dr. William Randolph Lovelace II, an expert in avi-
      ation medicine, and Col. Donald D. Flickinger, a physician who studied
high-altitude bailouts, advised the CIA to commission the David Clark
Company of Worcester, Massachusetts, to develop a new pressure suit.
   The David Clark Company in 1955 seemed an unlikely supplier for a
top-secret technology project. The company, established in the 1930s,
was primarily a manufacturer of girdles and brassieres. Its red, wood-
frame factory at 360 Park Avenue in central Worcester was staffed
mostly by seamstresses. But the company had edged into military work
during the war after rubber, a key component of its lingerie products,
was declared to be a strategic material restricted for military use. With-
                        136        Secret      Empire


out rubber, the company turned to making tents and parachutes. David
Clark, the company founder, also got into the business of designing and
making gravity suits, or G-suits, for pilots that would help limit the
body-stretching forces generated by rapid acceleration. By the late
1940s, the company was making partial-pressure suits for the nation's
top military test pilots.
   It was not long after Chuck Yeager broke the sound barrier in 1947
that Joseph A. Ruseckas joined the company to help it develop more ad-
        vanced pressure suits. When the CIA contracted with the Clark Com-
      pany in 1955 to make new suits for the CL-282 pilots, he became the
point man for the project, though he was not told at the time that he was
making outfits for the intelligence agency. Indeed, Ruseckas did not
know the real names of the pilots he fitted for partial-pressure suits or
the kind of aircraft and mission they would be flying. It was only after he
witnessed a series of pressure chamber tests at Wright-Patterson AFB
that Ruseckas realized his pressure suits might be destined for use over
the Soviet Union. The tip-off was the duration of the tests — pilots had
to remain in the chamber more than four hours in conditions similar to
those after an explosive decompression at 65,000 feet. That told
Ruseckas that the pilots and pressure suits were being tested for pro-
       longed missions over denied territory in a crippled aircraft.
   Each suit produced by the David Clark Company was custom mea-
      sured and tailored for a specific pilot. An exact fit was required to ensure
that the suit would contract tightly when activated. The fabric was a
blend of nylon and cotton — the nylon provided strength while the cot-
    ton made the outfit more comfortable against the skin. Even so, the suits
were hot and quickly became soaked with sweat during flights.
   The key to the model S-2 suit was a set of capstans, or inflatable
tubes, that were sewn into the garment. When activated after a sudden
drop in external air pressure, the capstans would expand, drawing the
suit more tightly around the crewman. During Ruseckas 's first years at
Clark, the Navy was the main customer, as it outfitted test pilots. A new
customer appeared in 1955 when Colonel Flickinger visited Worcester
and placed an order on behalf of the CIA. Company executives only told
Ruseckas that he could expect to see several test pilots from Lockheed
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                         137

who would need to be fitted with the best partial-pressure suits the com-
     pany could make. Not a word was said about a new spy plane.
  As Ruseckas became more aware of the extreme conditions the pilots
might face, he added an expandable chest bladder to the suit at the sug-
           gestion ofa colleague. It was designed to expand when pilots were ex-
        haling tohelp them breath more easily if cabin pressure failed and the
air pressure in the helmets increased. The chest bladder was eventually
expanded so that it covered the entire torso.
  Even with the improved S-4 suits, pilots still faced the danger of get-
     ting "the bends," the life-threatening condition that can develop after a
rapid reduction of air pressure. It is caused by the formation of nitrogen
bubbles in the blood. To avoid that danger if cabin pressure failed or
they had to bail out, pilots breathed oxygen for ninety minutes before
takeoff, an exercise that was called prebreathing. The preflight routine
produced an incongruous scene at the remote foreign airfields where
the planes were based before making flights over the Soviet Union. Be-
     fore commencing some of the most dangerous aerial missions of the
cold war, pilots would don an oxygen mask, settle into a comfortable
armchair or lounger, and breath pure oxygen for ninety minutes.
   While the various pieces of the CL-282 puzzle were being assembled,
Bissell and Johnson turned to the problem of finding a suitable test site.
Secrecy required that the airfield be far from public view and secure
from any unauthorized access, either by land or air. But the site needed
to be within reasonable flying time from the Lockheed complex in Bur-
bank. Edwards Air Force Base, located on the western edge of the Mo-
jave Desert, about 90 miles north of Los Angeles, had already secured a
place in aviation history as the site where Yeager shattered the sound
barrier in 1947 in a Bell X-l plane. But Edwards was considered to be
too close to civilian population centers. The same concern ruled out the
airstrip at a Lockheed assembly plant in Palmdale, California, not far
from Edwards.

  Johnson assigned Lockheed's top test pilot, Tony LeVier, and Dor-
sey Kammerer, a logistics specialist at the Skunk Works, to find a
good place. Using a Beech Bonanza, a single-engine aircraft, they
surveyed possible sites in the interior deserts of California and Nevada.
                        138         Secret      Empire


On April 12, 1955, Bissell and Gen. Ritland, the senior Air Force officer
assigned to the spy-plane project, joined LeVier and Johnson for an in-
         spection flight to a dry lakebed north of Las Vegas, not far from the gov-
            ernment's nuclear test range. Ritland was familiar with the area from
earlier service with a B-29 test squadron, which had dropped nuclear
weapons over the range. Ritland recalled an abandoned World War II
airfield near Groom Lake. The hard lakebed appeared large enough and
firm enough to handle the long landing strip that would be required for
theCL-282.
   Bissell recalled the discovery in his memoirs: "The area near Groom
Lake, which seen from the air was approximately three to four miles in
diameter and smooth as a billiard table, appeared to Johnson a promis-
    ing location to accommodate the long landing requirements of the U-2.
Descending for a closer look, we saw evidence of a temporary landing
strip, the kind of runway that had been built in various locations
throughout the United States during World War II for the benefit of pi-
     lots in training who might have to make an emergency landing. Faced
with the option of landing on this strip or the lakebed, LeVier chose the
lakebed. Once on the ground, we walked over to the airstrip to see if it
was viable. The closer we got, the deeper we sank into soft, sagebrush-
covered soil. Had we attempted to land on it, we most assuredly would
have crashed."
   The barren, windblown site was a two-hour flight from Burbank, all
but hidden among the arid mountains and vast empty spaces of the high
Southwest. It seemed ideal. Johnson playfully suggested they call the
desolate site Paradise Ranch. The place acquired several other names,
including Area 5 1 and Watertown Strip. The latter was a play on Wa-
tertown, New York, Allen Dulles's birthplace. But most people associ-
    ated with the new spy plane followed Johnson's lead and simply called it
The Ranch. When Bissell returned to Washington, he secured Eisen-
         hower's approval to add the landing strip and surrounding area to the
nuclear test site of the Atomic Energy Commission, a highly secure
swath of Nevada territory. The airspace over the entire nuclear test site
was restricted. That would keep civilian and even most military flights
from spotting the secret CIA air base.
 "This Thing        Is Made     Out   of Toilet      Paper"          139

   The air of mystery surrounding the nuclear test site, combined with
unidentified flying objects that were occasionally seen high in the skies
around the site, made the government reservation the subject of intense
speculation. Over the years, Area 51, which encompassed the airfield as
well as the surrounding nuclear test site, became famously associated
with reports about alien spaceships. Most of the UFO sightings were
stimulated by the new Lockheed plane and the subsequent test flights of
ever-more-advanced aircraft that the government secretly developed
during the cold war. Many of the sightings came at sunset when the
lower atmosphere was already cloaked in darkness but the sun could still
illuminate a plane flying in the stratosphere. In an era when no one
knew the United States was building planes that could fly that high, the
sight of the sunlight reflecting off an object streaking across the edge of
space led to dozens of alarmed reports, many of them from commercial
airline pilots mystified by the view as they flew across the Southwest.
   Not long after Bissell and Johnson's inspection trip, a construction
company cleared by the CIA began building a road into the site and a
small air base, including a new runway, control tower, three hangars,
and a mess hall. Wells were dug for water. Summertime temperatures at
the lakebed often soared above 120 degrees. One of the subcontractors
initially balked at the work after investigating the fictitious firm that
Johnson had established as a cover for the project. A subcontractor ex-
          ecutive told the prime contractor, "We looked them up in Dun and
Bradstreet and they don't even have a credit rating." The base, which
cost just $800,000 to build, was ready for use by July, though its wilder-
     ness location brought some unusual neighbors for the Lockheed crew,
including a bobcat that set up house under one of the offices and a rat-
desnake that turned up in the well of an airplane wheel.
  Johnson rushed to keep pace with construction and his promise to
turn over the first aircraft by summer. Wind-tunnel testing of a model
was completed in mid-March, showing the aircraft was aerodynamically
sound and capable of handling the flight conditions envisioned for it. To
ensure secrecy, the main pieces of the fuselage were fabricated at night
at Lockheed's main production plant and moved to the Skunk Works
before regular company workers arrived in the morning. The first fuse-
                       140        Secret     Empire


lage was removed from the jig, the fixture used for holding parts to-
       gether for assembly, in late May. Johnson recorded the milestone in his
log on May 2 1 . "Number one fuselage out of jig. Having a tough time
on wing. Put almost everybody on it."
   As Johnson was scrambling to complete the prototype, Soviet fighters
downed another American surveillance aircraft, this time a Navy flight
traveling at an altitude of 8,000 feet over the Bering Strait on June 22.
Three crew members were wounded, but the plane crash-landed safely
in Alaska. Uncharacteristically, Moscow expressed regret for the attack
and offered to pay for half the damages. The Soviet offer was probably
influenced by preparations for a four-power disarmament conference
scheduled in late July in Geneva that would be the first summit meeting
between Soviet and American leaders since the onset of the cold war.
  The first CL-282, affectionately known around the Skunk Works as
"Kelly's Angel" but officially labeled article 351, was ready for delivery
by mid-July. "Airplane essentially completed," Johnson noted on July
15. "Terrifically long hours. Everybody almost dead." Six days later the
finished aircraft was readied for transport to Groom Lake. Johnson had
kept his promise to produce an operational aircraft within eight months
of receiving approval to proceed with the project.
   The plane now needed an official name, or in military parlance an Air
Force designator. Since it was not a bomber, fighter, or transport plane,
those designations were inappropriate. To maintain secrecy, it could not
be called a reconnaissance aircraft. After some discussion, the Air Force
settled on classifying the plane as a utility aircraft. The aircraft designa-
     tor handbook listed two utility planes, the U-l and the U-3. So Kelly
Johnson's new spy plane was dubbed the U-2.
   The completion of the first plane came as President Eisenhower was
making a dramatic offer to the Soviet Union that would have made it
possible to dismantle the extraordinary secrecy surrounding the U-2
and send the plane over Soviet territory with the acquiescence of the
Kremlin. The "Open Skies" proposal, which Eisenhower unexpectedly
unveiled on Thursday, July 21, at the Geneva meeting with Soviet,
British, and French leaders, called for Washington and Moscow to per-
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                         141

mit one another to conduct aerial reconnaissance flights over each
other's military installations. For Eisenhower, the idea was directly tied
to the U-2, though he never mentioned the aircraft in his conversations
with the Russians. "I'll give it one shot," the president had told aides
when the plan was being drafted. "Then, if they don't accept, we'll fly
the U-2."
   Historians still debate Eisenhower's motivations in making an offer
that seemed both idealistic and calculating. It was a grand and visionary
proposal that in a single stroke could have lessened tensions between the
two nations, reduced the danger of surprise attack, and provided a
means for verifying arms control agreements, if such accords could be
reached. The six-day Geneva gathering at the ornate Palais des Nations
was ostensibly arranged so the leaders could talk about disarmament is-
     sues. The plan was fully consistent with Eisenhower's desire to put rela-
      tions with Moscow on a more stable and predictable footing and to
diminish the risk of a military miscalculation that could start a war. He
seemed to speak from the heart as he addressed the Soviet delegation,
which was led by Nikolai A. Bulganin, the prime minister, and Nikita S.
Khrushchev, the leader of the Communist Party. "I have been searching
my heart and mind for something that I could say here that could con-
      vince everyone of the great sincerity of the United States in approach-
      ing this problem of disarmament." As Eisenhower finished his
presentation, the conference room was shaken by a loud thunderclap
and the lights went out.
   It is hard to imagine that Eisenhower expected the Soviet leaders to
accept the proposal, or that he was unaware of the public relations ad-
         vantages that would come with a Soviet rejection. Though Bulganin re-
         sponded positively when his turn came to speak after the electric power
had been restored, the American initiative was quickly buried by Khru-
        shchev, who was the paramount Soviet leader. Khrushchev made his
contempt clear to Eisenhower when the two men talked as the formal
meeting adjourned for the day. Khrushchev, whose primacy in Moscow
was not yet clear to American experts, informed Eisenhower that he did
not agree with Bulganin and considered the overflight suggestion to be
                         142        Secret      Empire


a transparent espionage plot. He later told his son, Sergei, that he be-
       lieved Washington would use the flights to refine its targeting plans for
a nuclear strike against the Soviet Union.
   Despite the Soviet response, Eisenhower viewed the conference as "a
limited success." As he wrote in his memoirs, "The record was estab-
        lished: All could now see the nature of Soviet diplomatic tactics as con-
         trasted with those of the Free World. Peoples had been given a glowing
picture of hope and, though it was badly blurred by the Soviets, at least
the outlines of the picture remained."
   Though the world did not know it, the Soviet rejection of the "Open
Skies" proposal cleared the way for the U-2 to commence operations
over the Soviet Union less than a year later.
   On July 24, the day Eisenhower flew back to Washington, Kelly
Johnson loaded the first U-2 aboard a transport plane for shipment to
Groom Lake. Transporting the plane for its maiden test flight was no
easy maneuver. Since it had to be shielded from public view, and its air
worthiness had yet to be proven in flight, it could not be flown out of the
Lockheed airstrip in Burbank. So, the aircraft was disassembled and
the large pieces were covered in tarpaulins and loaded aboard two mo-
     bile ground carts. The carts were then placed aboard a C-124 transport
in the middle of the night for the flight to Nevada. The recently ap-
           pointed commander of the new base, Dick Newton, informed Johnson
that the loaded C-124 was too heavy to land on the thin, freshly paved
tarmac. Johnson flew ahead to Groom Lake in a smaller plane, in-
         spected the landing strip, and declared that it could handle the transport
plane if the air pressure in the tires was reduced. That would spread the
weight across a somewhat wider area of runway when the plane landed.
Johnson had to get officials in Washington to overrule Newton. The
C-124 landed without incident and the two ground carts were rolled out
of the plane and into one of the hangars, where the first U-2 was re-
             assembled and prepared for its maiden flight.
   Johnson had selected Tony LeVier to put the plane through its first
tests. LeVier, a fearless aviator, was born in Duluth, Minnesota, in 1913,
the son of an architect who had immigrated to the United States from
Norway. He first climbed into a cockpit at age fifteen and went on to be-
  "This Thing         Is Made     Out    of Toilet        Paper"          143


come Lockheed's leading test pilot. Over the years he had piloted more
than a dozen of the company's new planes into the air for the first time,
including the F-94 Starfire interceptor and the XF-104 Starfighter, a su-
          personic fighter with unusually short wings and a needle nose that was
frequently described as a "missile with a man in it." By the time he re-
      tired in 1974, LeVier had flown more than 240 types of airplanes and
was a legendary figure in the aviation business.
   LeVier had tested the speedy Starfighter a year earlier at Edwards
AFB. When Johnson first showed him the blueprints for the U-2, with
its long wings, he was amused. "First you have me flying your goddamn
F-104, which has the shortest wings ever built, and now you got me fly-
    ing abig goddamn sailplane with the longest wings I ever saw," he told
Johnson.
   On July 29, LeVier strapped himself into the cramped cockpit of the
U-2 for a series of dry runs alongside the runway. The taxi tests were de-
       signed to see how the plane accelerated and to give him some sense of
how the aircraft might perform in flight. At the slow ground speed set
for the tests, the U-2 was not expected to take off. But on the second
run, as LeVier accelerated toward 70 knots, the top speed prescribed by
Johnson, the lightweight plane left the ground, thanks to the extraordi-
      nary lift provided by the sailplane design. It kept flying with the engine
essentially running at idle.
   Because of the absence of runway markings and the flat expanse of the
lakebed, LeVier did not initially realize he was airborne. "The lakebed
was so smooth I couldn't feel when the wheels were no longer touch-
     ing." Once he discovered he was flying about 35 feet off the ground, he
pushed the throttle forward to pick up speed, fearful that the plane
would stall and crash at the lower taxi speed. The plane started to shake,
a sign of the buffeting that signaled a stall was imminent. LeVier man-
      aged to get the plane back on the ground safely, though the hard landing
blew out the two main tires and the plane bounced into the air and then
rolled for nearly a mile across the lakebed before stopping.
  Ernie L. Joiner, the chief flight test engineer for the U-2, watched the
bumpy ride with Johnson from a ground vehicle that chased the plane
down the runway. "The airplane disappeared in a cloud of dust and
                        144        Secret      Empire


sand," he said. "We could see those long flexible wings flapping about.
As we frantically chased after it, I thought Kelly was going to have a
heart attack."
   The overhead brakes, which seemed undersized for the aircraft,
erupted in flames as the plane finally came to a stop. Johnson and Joiner
roared up to the smoking U-2 and the fire was quickly put out with an
extinguisher.
  The scene could hardly have been more striking. One of the great air-
       plane designers of his time, and one of the nation's top test pilots, were
out in the middle of a vacant, prehistoric lakebed looking over a crippled
airplane that at that moment was probably the most important and most
secret piece of military hardware in the world.
   "Goddamn it, LeVier, what in hell happened?" Johnson shouted.
   "Kelly, the son of a bitch took off and I didn't even know it," LeVier
replied.
   Later that day Johnson noted dryly in his log, "No harm done. Air-
       plane was subjected to terrific test. Pogo sticks worked real well."
   The first planned flight came on August 4. Despite the thunderclouds
that were forming in the area by midafternoon, LeVier pointed the
plane down the runway a few minutes before 4 p.m. Moments later, after
a short takeoff roll, the U-2 was airborne and it climbed almost effort-
      lessly to 8,000 feet. "It flies like a baby buggy," LeVier radioed another
Lockheed pilot, Bob Matye, who was following the U-2 in a T-33, a
two-seat jet trainer that had made its first test flight six years earlier —
with Tony LeVier at the controls. Johnson trailed the two planes in a
C-47, a twin-propeller military transport.
   Because of the threatening weather, the flight was cut short after
forty-five minutes. LeVier and Johnson had argued for several days
about how best to bring the plane in for a landing. Johnson wanted the
plane to touch down nose first on its main landing gears at the front of
the fuselage, with the tail up. LeVier figured it would be better to land
on the front and rear wheels simultaneously, with the tail down. LeVier
had consulted with pilots familiar with the B-47 bomber, which had a
similar bicycle-type landing gear. They had advised him not to land on
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                         145

the nose wheel. But Johnson, who was famously obdurate, insisted on
his recommendation.

  "I came down and tried to put this thing on the nose wheel, like Kelly
wanted, ever so gently," LeVier said. "And the moment that airplane
touched the ground, it started to go into a porpoise. Well, an airplane
can bounce itself to pieces, so I gunned it and straightened it out and
went around and made another approach."
   Nearly everyone stationed at the base had assembled by the runway
to observe the test flight and landing. They watched with mounting
concern as LeVier made four more attempts to land the plane according
to Johnson's specifications. As LeVier descended each time, Johnson
peppered him with instructions on the radio. Every time the plane made
contact with the runway, it skipped and bounced back into the air.
   Johnson, by this point, was getting frantic. It had started raining and
he didn't care to waste any more time experimenting with landing pro-
          cedures. To dispense with the debate, he ordered LeVier to retract the
landing gear and make a belly landing, a flashback to his original con-
     cept for the plane.
   LeVier refused. "Kelly is getting a little bit jittery, and he said, 'Put it
down on the belly, put it down on the belly,' " LeVier recalled. "And I
said 'I'll do it my way before I do that.' And I went around and came
down just like I wanted to, and it went on perfect, and I'm down and
safe." Once again, the brakes performed poorly. Within minutes a trop-
     ical downpour flooded the lakebed, rendering the runway useless for the
rest of the day. Johnson and his Skunk Works crew celebrated that
evening with beer and another of the arm-wrestling competitions that
were common to these celebrations.
  Two days later, after some quick repair work to the brakes, LeVier
was back in the air. Johnson had surrendered on the landing technique,
and LeVier practiced bringing the plane down his way as the Lockheed
team prepared for the equivalent of a Broadway opening night — a
scheduled visit on August 8 by Bissell and a handful of other govern-
      ment officials. Johnson, after initially dismissing LeVier 's complaints
about the brakes, instructed mechanics to strengthen the system.
                       146        Secret     Empire


   It was a pity that Dick Leghorn would not be among the visitors, but
in an odd accident of history, he at least knew by the first week in August
that the airplane he had imagined for so long was finally taking form.
After leaving the Air Force planning staff in frustration in January 1953,
as Washington was preparing for the inauguration of Eisenhower,
Leghorn had returned to Kodak and moved to London to direct the
company's European operations. From there, he remained in touch
with friends like Jim Baker, the lens designer, and Amrom Katz, the op-
    tics expert, and kept abreast of the Air Force's anemic efforts to develop
a high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, including the modified Can-
        berra bomber that Leghorn had first proposed at Wright Field in 1952.
But Leghorn knew nothing about the U-2.
   Hoping to prod the Air Force, Leghorn submitted a paper outlining
his theories to U.S. News & World Report. The manuscript languished
there until Eisenhower unveiled his "Open Skies" proposal. Little more
than a week later, just as Kelly Johnson was readying the U-2 for its first
roll down the runway, the magazine went to press with a six-page story
by Leghorn that appeared under the headline "U.S. Can Photograph
Russia From The Air Now. Planes Available, Equipment on Hand,

Techniques Set."
   Drawing on his independent knowledge about the state of high-
altitude flight and photography, Leghorn wrote, "Aerial spying on the
Soviet Union — done covertly and without Soviet permission — can be
carried out with a very, very small probability of loss and with great

gains for the West."
   He added, "We can easily have airplanes with the necessary charac-
          teristics tofly high and fast, for long distances."
   Bissell and others involved with the U-2 project were stunned by the
statements. Leghorn seemed to be exposing their secret aircraft just
days before it was scheduled to make its first flight. Killian immediately
telephoned Leghorn, who was back in Rochester by then, and asked him
to come to Washington the next morning for a meeting. The two men
had known one another since 1937 when they met at MIT through the
Sigma Chi fraternity. Mystified by the summons, Leghorn flew to the
capital, where he met first with Killian and Land, who seemed disgrun-
 "This Thing         Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"                        147

tied by his article but did not explain why. They sent him on to see Bis-
sell, who also complained. Then, after asking Leghorn to sign a secrecy
agreement, Bissell told him about the U-2.
   For Leghorn, the news was sweet vindication. "Finally, someone had
seen the light and realized the importance of strategic reconnaissance,"
he later told Don Welzenbach, the CIA historian.
  On August 8, with Bissell but not Leghorn in attendance at The
Ranch, the U-2 made a flawless flight. For anyone accustomed to a nor-
    mal takeoff and ascent, the sight of the long- winged spy plane lifting off
the ground after rolling down the runway for a mere 200 yards or so
must have been astonishing. The steep angle of ascent was equally star-
ding. LeVier made a quick pass over the base to show off the plane, then
climbed quickly to 32,000 feet.
  By mid-August, LeVier had guided the plane to 52,000 feet. At the
end of the month, he turned the testing over to two Lockheed col-
        leagues and returned to Edwards AFB and Palmdale to resume test
flights on the XF-104 Starfighter. In early September the U-2 reached
65,000 feet. A second and third aircraft were soon delivered to the air
base, and the Skunk Works prepared to open a new production line in
Oildale, a small community just north of Bakersfield in California's cen-
    tral valley.
  Curtis LeMay and his fellow Air Force generals had watched the
progress with dismay. As the plane moved from proposal to reality, their
long-standing resistance to the aircraft was replaced by a sudden lust to
control it. Over the summer, LeMay moved to take over the program.
He met Dulles and Bissell when they were visiting Colorado Springs
and gruffly told the CIA officials the Agency was unqualified to operate
the planes. They refused to relinquish control. "I wanted this project
very much," Bissell later noted in his memoirs. "It was a glamorous and
high-priority endeavor endorsed not only by the president but by a lot
of very important scientific people on the outside. It would confer a
great deal of prestige on the organization that could carry it off success-
fully."
   The dispute eventually had to be resolved by Eisenhower, who had
already made clear his wish to keep the plane out of the Air Force's
                      148        Secret     Empire


hands. He once again ruled in favor of the CIA. "I want this whole thing
to be a civilian operation. If uniformed personnel of the armed forces of
the United States fly over Russia, it is an act of war, legally, and I don't
want any part of that."
   Gen. Nathan Twining, the Air Force chief of staff, was furious. "They
took it over lock, stock, and barrel. We had nothing to say about it. Ike
approved it, too, which he shouldn't have done. . . . CIA just kind of
talked him into these things."
   At the beginning of December, a year after Kelly Johnson had re-
        ceived the go-ahead from Washington to build the plane, he didn't dis-
      guise his sense of satisfaction at the accomplishments of the Skunk
Works. "We have built four flying airplanes, have the ninth airplane in
the jig, and have flown over our design altitude any number of times. It's
been quite a year. ..."
   With the U-2 fleet growing by the month, it would not be long be-
     fore Bissell had the planes he needed to fly over the Soviet Union. Now
he needed to match the aircraft with a corps of skilled pilots, a camera
system that could exploit the aerial access, and an organization capable
of handling and analyzing the large volume of photographs that his se-
     cret air force would produce.
                         CHAPTER            EIGHT




                 Photographing the
                  President's Cattle

Jim Baker's work on a new camera system had progressed through
   the winter and spring of 1955. He had a head start on Kelly John-
    son because Edwin Land had told the lens designer the previous sum-
     mer to come up with a new high-altitude camera, anticipating that the
Lockheed project would ultimately be approved. Baker hoped to pro-
       duce a new generation of aerial cameras that would be smaller, lighter,
and yet more powerful than anything that existed at the time. He didn't
have much choice — conventional cameras were too large and too heavy
for the lightweight aircraft and they couldn't produce the kind of de-
       tailed images from 1 3 miles high that Land wanted.
   The new plane was going to take the United States where it had not
gone before during the cold war — across thousands of miles of unexam-
     ined Soviet territory, including airfields, missile sites, naval bases, and
other military outposts. If Baker could produce a camera that would ex-
      ploit the audacious missions planned for the plane, Washington could
expect an intelligence bonanza. If he failed, President Eisenhower
would have a fancy new airplane with no useful purpose.
   In practical terms, Baker needed to produce a camera that would gen-
      erate two very different kinds of photographs: panoramic views of broad
stretches of land, and high-definition pictures of specific targets like air-
        fields. Italso had to be able to filter out haze and other atmospheric
conditions that might hinder picture-taking. "Overhead reconnaissance
from extreme altitude did indeed require some form of long-focal-

                                      149
                        150        Secret     Empire


length lenses of the highest precision," Baker recalled. "To obtain max-
       imum results from isolated and hazardous missions, the equipment also
had to be capable of photographing large tracts of land in clear sunlight
or through light haze, not only directly downward but with oblique
views as well."
   Baker knew, as he did initial planning in October 1954, that Johnson
had promised swift delivery of the first plane once he secured govern-
      ment approval. The realistic deadline was likely to be the following
summer. Baker correctly reasoned that initially he would have to draw
on proven components and engineering schemes rather than, as he put
it, trying to "reach out too far technically, toward untested frontiers."
But as a scientist, he aspired to be more inventive over the long term,
and so set to work to produce both a stopgap solution as well as two new
camera systems. His ambitious agenda called for the creation of three
different camera systems. The first system would be designated the A
camera, and the two newly designed systems would be the B and C cam-
eras.
  Some of the aerial cameras commonly used in the early 1950s were
World War II vintage. One was the trimetrogon K-17, which consisted
of three cameras taking pictures from different angles. Two faced to the
side and recorded oblique exposures toward the horizon. The third, in
the center, took a vertical view directly below the plane. Operating at an
altitude of 33,000 feet, this system produced pictures with a resolution
of 20 to 25 feet, meaning objects any smaller than 20 feet from end to
end could not be seen clearly. If the K-17 camera were carried to more
than twice that altitude, the pictures would not show military aircraft or
other objects of interest to defense planners in Washington. With intel-
        ligence analysts seeking pictures with a resolution of less than 10 feet,
the ideal camera for the CL-282 would have to be four times as power-
    ful as the K-17.
   Baker knew from his own contributions to the field that the K-17
standard had already been surpassed. The K-18 camera, which was
widely used by the Air Force, made use of a 36-inch telephoto lens. For
special intelligence missions, lenses with even longer focal lengths had
been   designed,    including a monster 240-inch lens. But cameras
    Photographing           the President's         Cattle           757

equipped with the larger lenses were far too large and heavy for
Johnson's lithe aircraft. That was true for a 48-inch panoramic lens sys-
     tem developed in the late 1940s that might otherwise have met Land's
standard for picture quality.
   After consulting with other experts in the field to see if an existing
camera could be modified to meet the CIA's deadline and intelligence
requirements, Baker recommended using the K-38 camera, a 24-inch
aerial system that was made for the Air Force by Trevor Gardner's old
firm in Pasadena, the Hycon Manufacturing Company. Richard Perkin,
one of the founders of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation, an optics com-
      pany, advised Baker that the K-38 could be redesigned to bring down
the camera's weight. Baker himself could adjust the lenses to improve
their acuity. Once the redesign was completed, the CIA contracted with
Hycon to produce the modified version of the K-38, which would be
called the A-l camera. Hycon signed on Perkin-Elmer to make the im-
         proved lenses, and Perkin-Elmer, in turn, hired Baker to handle the
work. At the end of January 1955, Baker set up a small company, Spica,
Incorporated, to separate this work from his duties at Harvard and his
consulting work for the government. By today's ethics standards, the
blurring of public and corporate interests by Gardner, Perkin, and
Baker would probably be unacceptable, if not illegal. In 1955, it was
seen simply as a logical way to get the job done as quickly and efficiently
as possible.
   The A-l system included two 24-inch cameras, one mounted verti-
      cally tolook directly beneath the airplane. The other was set in a rock-
     ing assembly that would swing the camera to the left and right for
oblique shots. The two large film magazines, the heaviest elements of
the photographic system, unspooled the film in opposite directions to
maintain a constant center of gravity in the camera bay. The A- 1 also in-
       cluded asmaller tracking camera that supplied continuous images of the
landscape the plane traveled across during its flight. This photographic
record would help photo interpreters determine the location of sites
captured in greater detail by the larger cameras. When a new rocking
mount was developed that allowed for sufficient transverse coverage
with a single lens, the second large camera was eliminated. After the
                        152         Secret      Empire


mount proved to be unreliable, another configuration was tried that
used three K-38 cameras, one pointed down, the other two aimed at op-
        posite side views. The new cameras came with customized, high-
definition lenses that were ground by Baker. These provided much
sharper pictures than the original K-38.
   The A-l camera was ready by mid- 195 5, when the test flights of the
U-2 began at Groom Lake. It would do the job, but Baker was deter-
       mined to come up with something better. Setting aside conventional ap-
                 proaches, he settled on an original design that would use a single
36-inch, medium wide-angle lens to produce both horizon-to-horizon
coverage and high-definition photographs of specific targets. The lens
aperture — the adjustable opening that limits the amount of light passing
through the lens — was fixed at flO, a relatively small diameter. This al-
        lowed him to preset the focusing at high altitudes without running the
risk that too much light would stream into the lens and overexpose the
film. Baker also dispensed with the large, heavy prism that normally
would be placed in a capsule below the lens to direct light upward into
the lens. He replaced the prism with a lightweight, swiveling mirror.
   The B camera could take pictures from seven overlapping positions
from horizon to horizon, producing panoramic coverage, while also
recording more detailed images of objects that passed directly under the
aircraft, and were therefore closer to the camera. Film was fed into the
camera from two magazines on either side of the shutter and lens as-
       sembly to maintain balanced weight distribution. That was critical to a
smooth flight because each spool could contain as much as 6,500 feet of
film, or more than a mile of film. The two rolls of 9.5 x 18-inch film
were exposed simultaneously, producing 18 x 18-inch negatives.
   It was a brilliant design and became the standard camera for the U-2.
By relying on one 36-inch lens instead of three 24-inch lenses, Baker did
away with not only the additional lenses but also the shutter assemblies
and other camera parts that came with them. That left more room for
film, making it possible to take advantage of extended flights across So-
     viet territory. Most important, the large lens yielded startlingly clear
photographs. From an altitude of 60,000 feet, or more than 1 1 miles
high, objects as small as 2.5 feet across could clearly be seen. The earth-
    Photographing            the President's Cattle                     153

bound equivalent would be taking a photograph of the Statue of Liberty
from the George Washington Bridge that when enlarged showed a
beach ball dangling from Miss Liberty's torch.
   Baker's quest did not end here. His next objective was a camera with a
240-inch focal length. When Kelly Johnson refused to enlarge the cam-
    era bay to handle the oversize model, Baker scaled back his ambitions,
settling for a 120-inch lens. By working with a new, light silica material
developed by Pittsburgh-Corning Glass Company, he eventually ex-
        tended the length to 180 inches, while keeping it within the plane's
weight limits. Baker managed to design the new lens in sixteen days by
using an early computer to run the complex calculations that were re-
        quired. Hycon built the camera in 1956, but when it was flight tested
early in 1957 it proved to be too sensitive for use in the U-2 because air-
      craft vibrations interfered with the acuity of the lens. A redesigned ver-
      sion was introduced during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, with
disappointing results.
   In the early months of 1955, as Baker was working on the cameras
and Johnson's team in Burbank was bolting together the first U-2, the
CIA was setting up a new organization to deal with the expected deluge
of photographs of the Soviet Union. The agency in 1953 had estab-
        lished asmall office to examine photographic intelligence, recognizing
that aerial reconnaissance, which had played a critical role during World
War II, was likely to become more important as the cold war pro-
         gressed. Ina smart move, the agency had hired Arthur Lundahl away
from the Navy to run the office.
  Lundahl proved to be another critical figure in the intelligence revo-
      lution that unfolded during the Eisenhower administration. He was to
the field of photo interpretation what Kelly Johnson was to airplane de-
     sign— a brilliant innovator and motivator who advanced the frontiers of
his profession in the service of his country. Lundahl, who died in 1992,
is remembered in the intelligence business as one of the main architects
of the modern photo-interpretation techniques and organizations that
helped make aerial and space reconnaissance an invaluable source of in-
           formation forpresidents during and after the cold war.
  Lundahl, a self-effacing man who walked with a bow-legged limp that
                        154        Secret      Empire


was the result of a college football injury, was born in Chicago in 1915.
He dropped out of the University of Chicago to work at a liquor distrib-
           utorship, but returned to school to major in geology. In 1941-42, he
participated in the Engineering, Science and Management War training
program, where he became interested in analyzing photographs. He
joined the Navy and after training at Dartmouth College, the Anacostia
Naval Air Station in Washington, D.C., and the University of North
Carolina, he was assigned to a Navy station in Adak, Alaska, in the
Aleutian Islands, where he analyzed photographs of potential enemy
targets in Japan.
   At this remote outpost in the Bering Sea, Lundahl became expert in
the arcane business of examining photographs in minute detail to deter-
      mine the locations and dimensions of bombing targets. The Navy and
Army Air Corps had been refining these techniques since World War I.
The process of making precise measurements by means of photography
is known as photogrammetry. Lundahl and his colleagues would break
into teams to study different sets of targets on the aerial photographs,
including harbors, airfields, fuel depots, barracks, and other military en-
             campments, and then plot the sites on large charts. The resolution of
the photographs was not great, but it was good enough to enlarge the
pictures five or six times, permitting them to discern the rough dimen-
      sions and layout of various targets.
   "Things like the length and width and the location and the bearing of
an airstrip you could hit with 99 percent accuracy," he recalled, "but cer-
     tain other problems were slippery — the nature of the surface of an air-
       field, whether it was crushed coral impregnated with oil or whether it
was asphalt or some other material, was difficult to tell."
   Lundahl enjoyed the painstaking work and quickly came to believe
that photographic intelligence could be a vital resource for the United
States. When the war ended, he was reassigned as a civilian to the Naval
Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington. He served there
from 1945 to 1953, first as chief of the photogrammetry division, then
as assistant chief engineer.
   Lundahl had a natural talent for explaining his arcane work in simple
    Photographing             the President's             Cattle            755

terms. Dino A. Brugioni, a World War II aerial reconnaissance veteran
and expert on Soviet industrial enterprises who joined the CIA in 1948
and later worked closely with Lundahl, found him to be "an extremely
articulate speaker" who could make "highly technical material under-
                standable to the layman." In subsequent years, this ability made Lun-
       dahl a familiar visitor to the White House, where he was often
summoned to brief presidents on the latest photographic intelligence,
including the dramatic pictures of Soviet missiles in Cuba that he
showed to President Kennedy on October 16, 1962, raising the curtain
on the Cuban missile crisis.
   Lundahl put his speaking skills to work during his stint at the Navy
center in Washington, extolling the benefits of aerial reconnaissance
and photo interpretation. He took every opportunity to tell military and
civilian audiences that better than 80 percent of the military intelligence
information during the war came from overhead photography. He often
quoted Gen. Werner von Fritsch, the commander-in-chief of the Ger-
     man army from 1935 to 1938, as saying, "The nation with the best pho-
             tographic intelligence will win the next war."
  But as the years passed, Lundahl could see his crusade was not win-
     ning many converts in the Navy. "The Navy at that time didn't have the
enlightened leadership, the budget, the inducements which were going
to take photo interpretation anywhere," he said. The Air Force, how-
      ever, was pouring resources into the field as it tried to come up with po-
           tential bombing targets in the Soviet Union. As Lundahl considered a
move in 1952, the CIA called to ask if he would like to come run a new
photo intelligence center it was creating. In 1953, he joined the Agency
as the first chief of the Photographic Intelligence Division.
   His new offices in M Building, one of the CIA's spartan quarters near
the Reflecting Pool and the Lincoln Memorial, was not quite the prom-
     ised land in photo interpretation. In fact, Lundahl found "very primitive
conditions with minimal equipment." The Agency had no experience in
the field. "I found that out for myself by looking around the place," he
recalled. "I opened many doors and entered many areas, and occasion-
     ally there would be a chap sitting there with a large Sherlock Holmes
                        156        Secret      Empire


magnifying glass, looking at some kind of small formatted picture, try-
    ing to form some opinions, but that was the only sign of an instru-
       mented, organized interpretation procedure."
  Some Agency employees thought the new division was superfluous.
"I immediately met a certain disbelief amongst the people I was working
with, particularly from the geographic area," Lundahl said. "There
were certain people who said, 'Oh well, we know you can make some
kind of a map sketch from aerial photography, but we don't think you
can do much beyond that."
   Lundahl pressed his bosses for additional resources, and by early
1954 his small staff of a dozen or so people started to make an impres-
      sion with its analytical work, mostly using old photographs of Soviet
military and industrial installations. He never stopped proselytizing to
his new colleagues about the advantages of photo intelligence. "You
have no idea what photography can do for you," he would tell them.
"This old photography you're looking at, World War II vintage and
handheld pieces from the Soviet May Day parades, are nothing com-
      pared to what you can do if you get high-resolution, large-scale aerial
photography that I know is possible at the present time."
  Lundahl soon got the opportunity to prove his point. On December
13, 1954, just days after Kelly Johnson had gotten the go-ahead to build
his new airplane, Lundahl, unaware of the plan, was notified that he had
been relieved of his duties and should report at once to Allen Dulles's
office. Puzzled and unnerved by the news, Lundahl rushed to the direc-
     tor's office, where he found both Dulles and Bissell. They told him
about the new Lockheed aircraft and the harvest of high-quality pic-
      tures itwas expected to produce. They instructed Lundahl to get in-
           volved with the project immediately and to create an organization that
could make effective use of the pictures. He would report directly to
Bissell, becoming part of the self-contained operation Bissell was con-
           structing to manage the reconnaissance program.
  In deciding to keep the photo interpretation work under CIA control,
Dulles had rejected the advice of the Agency's chief administrative offi-
    cer, Col. Lawrence "Red" White, who had suggested that the Pentagon
might be better equipped to handle the work. Dulles was not about to
    Photographing           the President's         Cattle           157

let a grand opportunity to expand his intelligence empire slip away.
White recalled that when he made the suggestion, Dulles lifted his
wire-frame glasses to his forehead and replied, "Red, you don't think
that after I've taken all those photos, I am going to let someone else tell
me what they mean."
   Lundahl's backwater photo shop was clearly unsuited for the volume
of photographs that were expected to start arriving by mid- 1956. Nor
could it operate under the severe secrecy strictures that the White
House had demanded. To keep the spy plane's operations as closely held
as possible, even from some of the most senior military commanders
and intelligence officials, the handling of the photographs and dissemi-
        nation ofthe information extracted from them would have to be tightly
controlled. Lundahl would have to build a separate, far larger operation,
and do so under orders that barred him from even mentioning the proj-
    ect to his immediate supervisors, who were not cleared to know about
the plane. They were told that Lundahl had been detached to work on a
special project for the director.
   Lundahl spent his first weeks on the assignment traveling around the
country to meet with Edwin Land, Kelly Johnson, Jim Baker, and the
other people managing various aspects of the project, advising them on
the photographic standards that would best serve the photo interpreters
he would be hiring. The CIA searched for a building in the Washington

area that could house the equipment and large staff* that would be
needed to review the pictures. Even though Kodak would handle most
of the film processing at another location, a monumental job in itself,
Lundahl still required factory-like quarters. But they also had to be non-
        descript to avoid attracting attention.
   There was nothing suitable among the buildings occupied by the CIA
near the Reflecting Pool. The Agency examined all kinds of potential
sites, including abandoned quarries and laundries. Lundahl and the CIA
eventually settled on the Steuart Building, a seven-story office building
at the corner of New York Avenue and 5th Street, N.W. The Steuart
Motor Company, a Ford dealership, occupied the first three floors, in-
          cluding ashowroom on the ground floor. The CIA rented the top four
floors, or about 50,000 square feet of workspace.
                        158        Secret      Empire


  The building was in disrepair and the location was problematic. Paint
flaked off the ceilings, water leaked down the walls, there was no air-
conditioning, no decent places to eat nearby, and street crime was a
problem in the neighborhood, especially at night. But Lundahl had to
make do with the offices, which quickly started to fill up with light tables
and other technical equipment, plus a growing staff. Because the pro-
      gram had Eisenhower's endorsement, Lundahl was able to recruit from
other agencies, including the military services, the State Department,
and even the Library of Congress. Most of the staff was under thirty
years of age and it included numerous women. During the war years, the
military services had assigned many women             to serve as photo inter-
preters.
   The CIA needed a secret code word for Lundahl's enterprise. He
suggested calling it the Automat, after the Horn and Hardart self-serve
restaurants by the same name in New York, which were open twenty-
four hours a day, seven days a week. "This is going to be the intelligence
Automat of Washington," he advised the Agency. So the nation's newest
intelligence organization was officially dubbed HTAUTOMAT "And
that was so right," Lundahl recalled after his retirement. "We never
closed our doors and turned off our lights."
   Before Lundahl could open the doors for the first batch of pictures,
Bissell had to come up with a group of skilled pilots willing to fly the
U-2 into Soviet airspace. Eisenhower had not made the job any easier by
instructing Bissell to use foreign pilots. The order reflected Eisen-
              hower's determination to distance U-2 operations from the U.S. mili-
      tary to make the flights less inflammatory if they were detected or
intercepted by Moscow.
   Finding a group of qualified foreign pilots was not easy. In June 1955,
before the first test flight of the U-2, the Strategic Air Command, which
had agreed to handle pilot training, came up with a number of foreign
pilots. They included several Greek airmen who had flown P-51 fight-
     ers, a single-propeller World War II airplane, over Albania and Bulgaria
for the CIA in the early years of the cold war. Eight of the foreigners
were selected for training and sent to Craig Air Force Base in Alabama.
A December 27, 1955, memo to Bissell reported that all of the pilots had
    Photographing            the President's Cattle                      159


"demonstrated average or above average qualifications as jet pilots." But
the memo also noted that the men were not fluent in English.
  The eight pilots were brought to Arizona for jet training. Four of
them eventually made it to the base at Groom Lake, and several made
test flights in the U-2, but they lacked the experience to handle the tem-
              peramental plane and were soon dropped from the program. "It's been
decided to use only American pilots, thank God," Kelly Johnson wrote
in his journal.
   Eisenhower would not get his wish, but the CIA was still under orders
not to use Air Force pilots on U-2 missions, at least not anyone still in
the service. The creative solution was to select crack Air Force pilots,
then have them resign from the service and go to work as civilians for
the CIA, with a promise that they could someday resume their Air Force
careers without a loss of seniority. This transmogrification was called
sheep-dipping, borrowing liberally from the generic name of the liquid
disinfectant that sheep are placed in before shearing to kill parasites and
clean their wool.
   The Air Force recommended drawing from several Strategic Fighter
Wings that were soon to be disbanded at Bergstrom AFB in Texas and
Turner AFB in Georgia. The pilots assigned to these wings had Korean
War combat experience in F-84 jet fighters, including prolonged flights
over water in the single-engine aircraft, useful preparation for
marathon missions over the Soviet Union.
   Martin Knutson was one of those pilots stationed at Turner AFB.
One day he was unexpectedly summoned by his squadron commander,
who cryptically informed Knutson that he would soon be approached
by someone from another government agency. He was given no further
information. The next day he received a call from a man who invited
him to come to the only hotel in Albany, Georgia, the town nearest the
air base. When Knutson arrived, his host flashed a government badge,
then told the pilot he was under consideration for a secret government
operation.
   Over the next several days Knutson met with the CIA representative.
"All I really knew was it was going to be a United States operation in
some exotic state-of-the-art airplane on a dangerous mission for the
                        160         Secret      Empire


good of the country." If Knutson passed a battery of medical and psy-
           chological tests, and cleared an exhaustive security check and polygraph
examination, he would be eligible to join the clandestine program at
$2,500 a month, triple his Air Force salary. Attracted by the pay and
prospect of adventure, Knutson agreed. As a swaggering fighter pilot,
he also imagined the new airplane would be a sleek, supersonic model
that could probably travel at least twice the speed of sound. Some of the
other pilots recruited at the same time figured they might be the first
men to rocket into space. They were sorely disappointed when they got
their first glimpse of the gawky, subsonic U-2.
   Knutson, born in 1930 in St. Louis Park, a suburb of Minneapolis,
started his flying career after the war as an electrical engineering student
at the University of Minnesota. He was inspired by a classmate studying
on the GI bill who had flown combat missions during World War II.
The fellow student had lost both his legs in a crash, but nevertheless de-
        scribed the thrill of flying to Knutson in the hours after class when the
two would repair to a nearby tavern for a few beers. Knutson joined the
Air Force and as soon as he was qualified as a pilot he was ordered to
Okinawa to fly combat missions during the Korean War. He had accu-
         mulated more than a thousand flying hours in single-engine jets by the
time the CIA came calling at Turner AFB, enough time to meet the ex-
          perience level required for the U-2.
   Like the handful of other men selected at Turner and Bergstrom,
Knutson was soon on his way to Washington for additional interviews.
Once the Agency was satisfied that he could handle the technical and
psychological pressures of long solo flights across the Soviet Union,
Knutson was discharged from the Air Force, as Eisenhower had in-
      sisted. After picking up his belongings in Georgia, he began an arduous
odyssey of test-taking and training that would take him to Ohio, New
Mexico, and other locations as the CIA prepared to bring him to Groom
Lake.
   One of the first stops was the Lovelace Clinic in Albuquerque. Three
years before John Glenn and his fellow Mercury astronaut candidates
set foot in the same clinic for the exhaustive and sometimes torturous
medical tests that Tom Wolfe would later make famous in The Right
    Photographing            the President's Cattle                      161

Stuff, Martin Knutson arrived at the medical center for a visit that he
would never forget.
  The clinic captured the extemporaneous nature of the whole U-2
program. Looking back through dozens of photographs of pilots and fu-
     ture astronauts taking medical tests at the clinic, it is easy to see why
some of the men found the place strange and forbidding. The diagnos-
    tic equipment was large and intimidating, the men always seem to have
wires or tubes connected to their bodies, and the clinic staff sometimes
appear eerily detached. The pictures look like scenes from a bad Holly-
      wood science fiction movie. Despite the ostensible precision of the tests,
much of the clinic's work in aviation medicine was, at the time, experi-
           mental, even improvisational, and it seems clear from the institution's
history that a fair measure of opportunism was involved in its effort to
attract government support and become part of the astronaut program.
Still, it was a serious medical enterprise that advanced the frontiers of
aviation and space medicine.
   Lovelace was selected by the CIA because it was one of the few pri-
     vate clinics in the country that did aeromedical research, an esoteric dis-
           cipline that dealt with the effects of flight on the human body. Though
the Army established a School of Aviation Medicine in 1918, and later
founded the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright Field, there were still
not many specialists in the field when the U-2 was ready to fly. Lovelace
had the added advantage of being in Albuquerque, which at the time was
a small, out-of-the-way city where the testing of pilots for a secret pro-
       gram was not likely to attract much attention.
  The clinic, which was then a four-story adobe building on Gibson
Boulevard adjacent to Kirtland AFB, was largely the creation of two un-
         common men, Dr. William Randolph Lovelace and his nephew, Dr.
William Randolph Lovelace II, known respectively by friends as "Uncle
Doc" and Randy. The clinic grew out of the elder Lovelace's practice,
which developed at the turn of the century when the newly minted St.
Louis physician moved to the dry climate of the New Mexico Territory
to help recover from a case of pulmonary tuberculosis. The area was ad-
         vertised atthe time as "nature's sanatorium for consumptives." He liked
the dry, open spaces and mountains, and stayed on to practice medicine,
                        162        Secret      Empire


first as a country doctor associated with the Santa Fe Railroad, then as a
physician in Albuquerque. The clinic began in 1922 as a partnership be-
       tween Lovelace and another Albuquerque doctor, Edgar T. Lassetter,
who had also moved to New Mexico when he was tubercular.

   It was Randy Lovelace — the son of Uncle Doc's older brother,
Edgar — who turned it into a center for aviation and space medicine. He
was a charming man with a gift for invention and a knack for self-
promotion. By making important contributions to flight safety with a
new oxygen mask and high-altitude bailout equipment, and forming al-
       liances with powerful military and civilian leaders in Washington, he
became a prominent figure in aviation and space circles. He supervised
the medical testing of the Mercury astronauts in 1959 and was ap-
          pointed NASA's director of space medicine in 1964, a year before he was
killed in a plane crash in the mountains outside Aspen, Colorado.
   By the time Martin Knutson got to Albuquerque in 1955, Randy
Lovelace had turned the clinic into an aviation medical center that,
among other things, conducted exhaustive physical and mental exams
for military and civilian pilots. The CIA hired the clinic to run the U-2
pilots through an expanded testing regimen and to provide emergency
medical services at Groom Lake when Tony LeVier and the other Lock-
      heed pilots took the new plane out for its initial flight tests. Donald Kil-
gore, a clinic doctor who had flown eighty-one combat missions in the
Pacific theater as a Navy pilot during World War II, was dispatched on
short notice to the test site in the summer of 1955. On days when the spy
plane was airborne, Kilgore rode along in one of the support planes that
monitored the flights. "I was given a parachute and a first-aid kit," he re-
       called, "and told that if the U-2 crashed my job was to bail out and give
medical assistance to the pilot."
   When Knutson got to Albuquerque he checked into the Bird of Par-
       adise Motel, registering under an assumed name, then reported to the
clinic. The tests began after he gave the clinic a full account of his
family's medical history. Every organ and bodily function was examined
as the doctors tried to determine whether he could withstand the condi-
      tions he might encounter in the U-2. One of the most painful was a ver-
     tigo test, described in technical terms as "a test of labyrinthine function
    Photographing            the President's            Cattle            163


by the standard caloric method." In practical terms, it involved pouring
ice water into Knutson's ears. Another test required Knutson to float
naked in the "sensory deprivation tank," an unlit pool where he could
see and hear nothing. Dr. Kilgore said most of the pilots quickly became
disoriented and panicky.
   Knutson and the other men could not fathom why some of the tests
were done. In truth, the Lovelace clinic wasn't sure either. "It was a
shotgun approach to physical evaluation," Dr. Kilgore recalled. "We
were testing to determine benchmarks, but we weren't certain what
would yield meaningful results. Over time we weeded out the tests that
weren't important."
   Knutson's preparations finally ended when he was ordered to The
Ranch in January 1956. On the flight from Southern California he met
the other freshman U-2 pilots for the first time. One of the men came
from his old squadron in Georgia. The CIA had been so intent on pre-
         serving security that it had kept the pilots separated during their weeks
of testing.
   As the Lockheed shuttle flight from Burbank set down at Groom
Lake, Knutson and the other men got their first look at the mystery
plane they were going to fly. More than forty years later, Knutson could
still remember his reaction when he saw the oddly shaped aircraft,
which was most certainly not the futuristic supersonic plane he had pic-
        tured. "Itook one look at it and said I don't want anything to do with
this goddamned thing."
   Knutson's attitude changed quickly once he started flying the plane.
"I found out this was no kids' toy," he said. "It was going to take a lot of
skill to handle this machine." As Tony LeVier and the other Lockheed
test pilots had discovered, the U-2 was a demanding airplane that re-
             warded highly disciplined piloting with breathtaking performance, in-
              cluding the opportunity to travel at the edge of space. But there was
little margin for error. Knutson said, "It was the highest- workload plane
I've ever flown. You had to mind the store intently or the airplane would
get out of control."
   Because the aircraft lacked room for a second pilot, there was no
chance for Knutson to take the U-2 aloft with an instructor at the con-
                       164        Secret     Empire


trols. Each pilot had to learn for himself, with the aid of preflight train-
     ing and advice radioed from an instructor who tailed the U-2 in another
plane. (A second seat was added in later training models.) The accelera-
       tion and angle of ascent on takeoff, as LeVier knew, were tremendous.
"Almost as soon as you put it at full throttle it was ready to come off the
ground," Knutson said. "Keep in mind this aircraft will come apart if it
goes over 240 knots at lower elevations. To keep the airspeed down after
takeoff, you had to bring up her nose. Almost instantly you get into a 60-
degree climb or pull back on the power. Nobody liked to pull the power
back; they liked to experience that eye-watering takeoff."
   Once the plane reached its cruising altitude above 60,000 feet, the pi-
    lots had to worry about the "coffin corner," the narrow band of airspeed
they had to maintain to avoid a low-speed stall or a high-speed buffet-
     ing, either of which could rip off the wings or tail section. Knutson
learned to fly within this 6-knot zone by constantly checking his air-
       speed indicator. But the pilots also had to monitor engine performance
closely because the power plant lost so much thrust in the thin air. One
of the design issues that had challenged Johnson and his crew looked
even scarier in reality: At cruising altitude, the powerful jet engine oper-
     ated at less than 10 percent of its capacity, producing barely enough
thrust to keep the plane in the air. Knutson found, "You had to run it
right at its design limits and temperatures. You had a readout of the ex-
       haust gas temperature and you ran the engine within one degree of its

 limit."
   "I got cross-eyed after a while," he said, "because you had to keep one
eye fixed on the airspeed indicator because that was a life-or-death mat-
     ter, and you used the other to keep track of everything else in the cock-

   Because of space and weight limitations, Johnson had installed a min-
       h."amount of navigational instruments. The plane came with a radio-
     pimal
compass and a downward-looking periscope designed by Jim Baker that
allowed pilots to see points below the aircraft when there was no cloud
cover. For navigation when the ground was not visible, Johnson pro-
       vided a sextant that was built into the viewfinder in the cockpit. The
    Photographing           the President's Cattle                    165

most advanced spy plane in the world relied on an updated version of
the navigational tool invented in the eighteenth century.
  The U-2's flight range was phenomenal. Pilots ventured across
North America on flights that lasted as long as nine hours and covered
thousands of miles. The gliding ability of the plane was proven on April
14, 1956, when the engine flamed out on a U-2 as it was flying west over
the Mississippi River at the Tennessee border. Jake Kratt, the pilot,
managed to restart the engine, but another flameout occurred roughly
600 miles later. From there, the plane glided for 300 miles until it
landed at Kirtland AFB outside Albuquerque. The CIA and Air Force
had planned for just such an event by sending sealed orders to every Air
Force base in the country instructing commanders on what to do if the
U-2 came in for an emergency landing. The answer was to get the plane
out of sight as quickly as possible. That was done at Kirtland, but not be-
      fore military police got a glimpse of the aircraft and Kratt, who was
wearing one of Joe Ruseckas's strange-looking pressure suits. One of
the policemen said the pilot looked like he had come from Mars.
   The long flights exposed some shortcomings in cockpit amenities.
The David Clark Company had not anticipated that pilots might need
to urinate while they were in the air. The initial fix for this oversight was
to stick a catheter into the pilot's penis before he put on the suit so that
urine could be collected during the flight. This solution proved to be
highly uncomfortable and, by the fall of 1955, an external bladder was
added that allowed the men to urinate normally during flight.
   The pilots also needed to drink and eat during prolonged flights. A
self-sealing hole was placed in the face mask so pilots could sip sweet-
      ened water through a tube to prevent dehydration at high altitudes. In a
preview of things to come in the manned space program, pureed food
was stored in soft containers. The food could be squeezed through a
tube when a pilot was hungry. Even with these measures, pilots could
lose as much as six pounds during an eight-hour flight.
   The view from 65,000 feet made up for much of the discomfort and
danger. Pilots could see 200 miles in any direction. Cloud formations
drifted by far below and the curvature of the earth was plainly visible.
                        166        Secret     Empire


Overhead, stars and planets twinkled in the darkness of space. "From
that height," Knutson said, "you realized that man had actually made
very little impact on the earth, at least compared to what nature had

 done."
   Once flights began over the Soviet Union, of course, there wouldn't
be much time for sightseeing and spiritual contemplation. And by the
spring of 1956, that time was fast approaching. The first group of pilots
was nearing the end of their training period, and Kelly Johnson had pro-
       duced nine planes, enough to send a detachment overseas. Pratt &
Whitney was shipping the improved J57 engine that was less prone to
flameouts, Jim Baker's A camera was in hand and the B camera was near-

ning.ing completion, and Arthur Lundahl's photo automat was up and run-

   Congress, which had been paying for the program through the CIA's
budget for more than a year without knowing about it, had finally been
informed on February 24 by Allen Dulles. He told the two ranking
members of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Republican Lev-
erett Saltonstall of Massachusetts and Democrat Richard B. Russell of
Georgia. They, in turn, suggested that Dulles also notify the House,
which he did by meeting with Republican John Taber and Democrat
Clarence Cannon of the Appropriations Committee. It seems incon-
         ceivable bytoday's standards that the executive branch could launch and
finance a secret aircraft program without first informing Congress and
getting its consent. But in the 1950s, before the disclosure of CIA abuses
and the establishment of congressional committees to oversee the CIA
and other spy agencies, the delay in informing Congress about the U-2
was not unusual. Nor was the decision to limit the briefing to just four
lawmakers. For the next four years, until Francis Gary Powers was shot
down over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960, they were the only mem-
     bers of Congress who were officially informed that the U-2 was flying
over the Soviet Union.
  The parsimonious treatment of Congress reflected the general atti-
     tude about intelligence matters that prevailed in Washington at the
time. Put simply, spying was considered to be pretty much an exclusive
domain of the executive branch, a business that both the White House




                                                                                   J
    Photographing            the President's           Cattle            167

and Congress believed was too secret and too specialized to be closely
monitored on Capitol Hill. A handful of congressional leaders were
kept informed about CIA activities. They, in turn, assured that adequate
funding was provided for the Agency through secret accounts that were
hidden in Defense Department appropriations bills.
   The operating assumptions at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue pre-
        sumed that the executive branch could be trusted to handle espionage
matters without tight congressional oversight and that sensitive security
information was likely to be compromised if widely circulated among
members of Congress. In reality, this system distorted the constitutional
balance of powers by putting Congress on the sidelines and leaving the
White House and CIA virtually unaccountable for intelligence activi-
    ties. The unequal apportionment of power worked well enough in the
case of the U-2 and other technological projects, where the CIA had the
freedom to move creatively and quickly, but it proved unwise in other
areas, especially covert operations, where greater congressional in-
            volvement might have kept the White House and the Agency from
overreaching. The dangers were not fully appreciated until the nation
learned in the 1970s about CIA assassination plots and other dubious
activities.
  By the end of March, the U-2 had flown at an altitude of 73,800 feet.
To ensure that Eisenhower fully appreciated the dazzling hardware at
his disposal, Bissell sent the U-2 over Eisenhower's farm in Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania. Photographs taken from 60,000 feet showed not only
some of the president's cattle but also their feeding troughs.
  Andrew Goodpaster was with the president when he was shown the
pictures. "Eisenhower said, 'This is close to incredible.' The idea that
from 60,000 feet or more you could see that kind of detail, you could
achieve that kind of resolution was really awesome."
   Before the first detachment of planes could be packed up and shipped
overseas, a public cover story was needed to deal with questions that
were bound to come up. It was certain that the U-2, with its elongated
wings, pogos, and other unconventional components, would attract at-
        tention asit took off and landed at foreign military bases, no matter how
much effort was made to conceal the plane while it was on the ground.
                        168         Secret      Empire


   Bissell and his staff came up with the idea that the plane's ostensible
mission would be high-altitude weather research, and that its official
operators would be the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics,
NACA, which was later reconstituted and renamed the National Aero-
         nautics and Space Administration, NASA. If a U-2 was ever lost over
hostile territory — a prospect that was considered unlikely in 1956 — the
world would be told the plane had been on a weather research mission.
When Killian and Land later learned of the emergency deception plan
just days before the first flight over the Soviet Union, they were
alarmed. If a plane was downed, they said, Washington should take full
responsibility and declare that the flights were necessary to guard
against surprise attack.
   On April 29, the first set of planes and support staff — Detachment A,
an Air Force-led unit that worked for Bissell — was ready to make the
move to Britain. On May 1, four dismantled U-2s stored aboard a
C-124 transport arrived at Lakenheath air base in East Anglia, where
they were reassembled. On May 7, the director of NACA, Hugh Dry-
den, issued a statement in Washington announcing that a new aircraft
developed by Lockheed and flown by the Air Force Air Weather Service
would be studying natural forces present at high altitude, including the
jet stream, the ozone layer, clear air turbulence, and cosmic rays. For
public consumption, Detachment A was named the 1st Weather Recon-
           naissance Squadron, Provisional. This designation was true to the spirit
of the enterprise. Provisional Air Force units did not have to report to
higher headquarters. Additional press releases described weather moni-
       toring equipment that would be used aboard the plane and informed the
public that the program would involve operations in Britain and "other
parts of the world." That was a nice euphemism for the Soviet Union.
                           CHAPTER            NINE




                 Big Game Hunting

D wight Eisenhower               had not hesitated in October 1954 when
      James Killian and Edwin Land advised him to build an untested
new spy plane to plumb the mysteries of Soviet military power. Now,
seventeen months later, he had to decide whether to put the plane to
use. This time he hesitated, for good reason.
   Relations with Moscow were warming ever so slightly in 1956, and
Eisenhower did not want to undermine the chances for further im-
            provement bybrazenly invading Soviet airspace, especially if there was a
risk that the U-2 would be detected and shot down. Yet the White
House needed concrete information about Soviet military forces now
more than ever, both to gauge Moscow's strength and to dampen a
growing political furor over the adequacy of American defenses. The
charge that Moscow was gaining military superiority loomed as a poten-
      tially potent issue for the Democrats in the 1956 presidential and con-
                gressional elections.
   The conflicting pressures bearing down on Eisenhower were intense,
and he was not in the best of health. He had suffered a heart attack in
late September 1955 while vacationing in Colorado, and was hospital-
      ized there for six weeks before returning to Washington. Eisenhower
had recuperated sufficiently by the end of February 1956 to announce
his intention to run for reelection. Then, on the night of June 7, the
president experienced intense abdominal pains, leading his wife,
Mamie, to fear he was having another heart attack. He was rushed from
the White House to Walter Reed Army Hospital, where physicians de-
         termined hehad a blocked intestine and ordered emergency surgery. As

                                        169
                       170        Secret      Empire


he was recovering, Eisenhower had to decide whether to launch the U-2
into Soviet airspace the first week in July.
   The demand for definitive intelligence information on Soviet
bombers and missiles had only increased since Trevor Gardner had
helped sound the alarm in 1953 that the United States was in danger of
falling behind the Soviet Union in new weapons technology. Reports
that Moscow was fielding a larger fleet of long-range bombers than
Washington had become a volatile political issue in the capital as Dem-
         ocratic congressional leaders such as Senator Stuart Symington of Mis-
      souri and Senator Henry Jackson of Washington warned the nation
about a growing "bomber gap." There was also the first stirring of pub-
   lic concern about Soviet missile tests and the prospect that a correspon-
      ding "Missile Gap" would someday give the Russians a decisive military
advantage. Newspapers and newsmagazines carried alarming stories
about the growing Soviet threat.
   The political clamor about rising Soviet airpower had intensified after
the first public reports about the new Bison bomber in 1954, when the
aircraft made its debut by flying over Red Square during the annual May
Day festivities. This was nine months after the first sighting of the plane
at Ramenskoye airfield outside Moscow. Harrison Salisbury, the New
York Times correspondent in Moscow, reported on the front page the
next day, "The Soviet Union unveiled at a May Day celebration today its
new four-jet, inter-continental bomber. It is big enough and has enough
range to deliver the latest nuclear weapons to far distant points." Salis-
     bury also noted that the air exhibition on the sunny spring day included a
squadron of nine new medium-range bombers equipped with twin jet
engines. "The new Soviet aircraft presented an exciting and formidable
sight as they approached Red Square," Salisbury said. The CIA soon se-
        cretly figured the Kremlin would produce enough of the Bison bombers
to start fielding operational units by the end of 1956, and estimated the
Russians would have 50 aircraft by mid- 195 7 and 250 by mid- 1959.
   The prototype of America's newest intercontinental jet bomber, the
eight-engine B-52, had made its maiden test flight in 1952. By May
1954, B-52s were beginning to roll off the production line at the Boeing
plant in Seattle, and a second assembly site was soon opened in Wichita,




                                                                                  ,
                    Big Game       Hunting             171


Kansas. The long-distance bombers, which could be refueled in flight,
would reduce Washington's dependence on overseas bases, which were
more vulnerable to attack than those in the United States.
   A little more than two weeks after the sighting of Bison bombers over
Red Square, Gen. Nathan Twining, the Air Force chief of staff, declared
that the Bison bomber had been developed for the sole purpose of
reaching "important targets in the United States." Speaking in Ama-
rillo, Texas, on Armed Forces Day, General Twining said the Soviet air
force "is by far the biggest air force in the world," and that it included
"thousands more combat planes than the United States Air Force, Navy,
Marines and Army combined."
  When the nation's top military planners assembled at the Marine
Corps base in Quantico, Virginia, on June 19, 1954, for a weekend re-
     view of American defenses, a senior Pentagon official told them that
Moscow was narrowing the American lead in weapons technology.
Donald A. Quarles, assistant secretary of defense for research and devel-
          opment, said, "We must conclude that on balance our technical position
vis-a-vis the Soviets is less favorable than it was a year ago. Our margin
of advantage has been narrowed and we must face the sober inferences
to be drawn from these facts." The next day, Secretary of Defense
Charles E. Wilson offered a somewhat more positive assessment, in-
          forming the group that American military technology was still two to
three years ahead of the Soviet Union.
   Though Eisenhower by this time had given Lee DuBridge and James
Killian approval to start organizing a study about the threat of surprise
attack, he gave no public indication of his concern while attending the
Quantico conference. He arrived at the base in the Virginia countryside
in an open-top limousine with a new golden-headed putter in his hands.
The club had been given to him by a Republican delegation from Long
Island before he departed the White House. Not long after reaching
Quantico, the president teed off in a foursome that included General
Twining. When his first drive carried straight and far down the fairway,
reporters and photographers playfully suggested he try again. Eisen-
        hower grinned and told his fellow golfers, "They're determined to
prove it was an accident."
                          172         Secret       Empire


   The contrast between Eisenhower's closed-door deliberations about
the Soviet threat and his public posture was characteristic of his presi-
        dency. Even as he made far-reaching decisions in private to augment the
collection of intelligence and strengthen American defenses, he publicly
dismissed assertions that Washington was falling dangerously behind
the Soviet Union in military power and technology and even belittled
Soviet advances. This dichotomy clearly reflected a deliberate, politi-
      cally expedient effort to use the presidential soapbox to reassure the na-
       tion about its defenses and prevent a needless surge in military
spending. Eisenhower's inarticulateness may also have contributed to
his flaccid and sometimes opaque statements.
   Whatever the cause, such statements were legion. In early 1956, for
example, as concern mounted in Washington about Soviet missiles,
Eisenhower publicly discounted the potential value of the weapons, say-
    ing they were not as accurate as bombs dropped from planes and would
therefore have to be armed with exceptionally powerful nuclear war-
       heads and used in great numbers that would inevitably cause vast de-
                struction. All this was true at the time — more precise guidance systems
were not developed until the end of his presidency — and his views
amounted to an early preview of the doctrine of nuclear deterrence,
which presumes that the likelihood of mutual annihilation would dis-
             courage the United States and the Soviet Union from engaging in a nu-
     clear war. Eisenhower also said during the same appearance that he had
made the missile program the Pentagon's highest research priority. But
his comments nevertheless left the impression that he was not greatly
alarmed by the Soviet drive to produce long-range missiles.
   The administration's effort to hold down defense spending also in-
      vited criticism that Eisenhower was neglecting security issues. This was
ironic, given Eisenhower's long, distinguished service as an Army offi-
      cer. But his commitment to keeping government spending down al-
          lowed his critics to argue that he was neglecting defense. The reality was
a good deal more complicated. Though the administration initially did
fail to make adequate investments in the American missile program and
moved slowly to get the nation into space, Eisenhower was hardly indif-
                    Big Game        Hunting             173


ferent to national security threats. Indeed, his administration trans-
        formed American military power by developing a host of new weapons
and intelligence systems. These technological breakthroughs laid the
basis for American military might through the remainder of the twenti-
     eth century. No modern president other than Franklin Roosevelt, who
authorized the development of atomic weapons, so dramatically altered
the nature of military power.
   The country, of course, could not see the full extent of Eisenhower's
initiatives as they unfolded. Programs such as the U-2 were hidden alto-
       gether from public view. And Moscow's strength was unquestionably
growing, as was its capability to launch a surprise attack. Every sign that
the Soviet strategic arsenal was expanding fueled fears about America's
vulnerability and gave both Democrats and conservative Republicans an
opportunity to raise hell.
  Just such an occasion appeared on May 1, 1955, even as Kelly John-
     son was racing in secret to complete the first U-2. That day the skies
over Moscow seemed to be filled with hulking Bison bombers. Western
military attaches counted more than thirty planes during the May Day
celebration, suggesting a robust rate of production. The diplomats
didn't realize the show was a clever illusion created by just ten planes
that circled around Moscow out of view before making repeated passes
over Red Square. As word spread over the next few days about the So-
     viet show of strength, the Pentagon issued a terse statement that
Moscow had begun running formation flights of its new intercontinen-
   tal bomber, a way of saying that the new planes were coming off the pro-
           duction line at a fast rate and that the Russians were rapidly putting
them into service.
  Senator Symington, who had served as Air Force secretary in the
Truman administration, soon demanded that the Senate examine the
unsettling developments. "It is now clear that the United States, along
with the rest of the free world, may have lost control of the air, except
for the possibility that we still have advantages in base location and
training," he said in mid-May "But it is now also clear that in quality as
well as quantity of planes the Communists are at least in the process of
                        174       Secret      Empire


surpassing the United States, and I am confident that they are well
ahead with the production of the possible ultimate weapon — the inter-
            continental ballistic missile."
   Richard Russell, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Com-
       mittee and the Democrats' leading authority on military issues, an-
            nounced on May 1 7 that the committee would investigate the state of
American airpower. He turned the job over to a subcommittee headed
by Lyndon Johnson, the Democratic floor leader. Eisenhower quickly
rejected Symington's charges, assuring the nation the next day that it
was "just not true" to suggest that the technical or numerical superiority
of the Air Force had been "lost in a twinkling." But, in truth, neither
Eisenhower nor anyone else in Washington really knew how many
Bison bombers the Russians had built or how far advanced the Soviet
missile program was.
   In late June of 1955 a presidential commission headed by former
president Herbert Hoover said as much. A commission task force, di-
       rected byone of the nation's most respected retired military figures,
Gen. Mark Clark, pronounced itself "deeply concerned over the lack of
adequate intelligence data from behind the Iron Curtain." The panel,
which was probably unaware of the U-2 program, called on the govern-
      ment to "exert every conceivable and practicable effort" to acquire reli-
     able intelligence information, including the "full use of technological
capabilities."
   Trevor Gardner, increasingly impatient with the fitful pace of the
Pentagon's missile program, issued a warning in September about the
Soviet missile threat. "The most complex and baffling technological
mystery today is not the Russian capability in aircraft and nuclear
weapons, but rather what the Soviet progress has been in the field of
guided missiles." Throughout the fall and early winter, Gardner pressed
the administration and Congress to pump an additional $200 million
into General Schriever's missile program and other Air Force technol-
     ogy projects, roughly a 30 percent increase in the service's research and
development budget. His proposal was rebuffed by the civilian leader-
      ship of the Air Force and Defense Secretary Wilson, but on February 1,
1956, Wilson said he would accelerate the missile effort and would
                   Big Game      Hunting            175


soon appoint a civilian "czar" to manage the nation's missile programs
and ensure that they received sufficient money and manpower. The
Air Force and Army had competing programs at the time to develop
intermediate-range ballistic missiles.
  Wilson's announcement was a transparent effort to blunt Gardner's
complaints and to respond to escalating criticism from the Senate about
the Pentagon's missile work. Only hours before Wilson spoke, Senator
Jackson had blasted the administration for underestimating Soviet mili-
     tary capabilities and neglecting its own missile projects. In a somber
speech that drew national coverage, Jackson predicted that the Russians
would test a missile with a range of 1,500 miles before the year was out.
That, he said, would overturn Western military strategy and possibly
disrupt the NATO alliance. As Jackson saw it, a Soviet Union armed
with such missiles could use "ballistic blackmail" to pressure Western
European nations to deny the United States access to air bases on their
soil, forcing Washington to pull its bombers back to American territory.
He called for appointment of a missile boss with the authority to run the
programs with the same intensity that characterized the Manhattan
Project. "Soviet victory in this race for discovery would be shattering to
the morale of our allies and to our own self-confidence," he told the
Senate. "For the first time, Moscow would have beaten us in a crucial
scientific-industrial race."
   Unimpressed by Wilson's promises — and no doubt disappointed that
he was not likely to be named missile czar because of his stormy de-
        meanor— Gardner resigned on February 8, 1956, after a final, futile
round of meetings with Wilson in Miami and the Bahamas, where the
defense secretary was vacationing. At a press conference earlier in
the day, Eisenhower was asked to comment on the views of Jackson and
Symington. "Well," he said dryly, "I am always astonished at the amount
of information that others get that I don't. ... I think, overall, we have
no reason to believe that we are not doing everything that human sci-
      ence and brains and resources can do to keep our position in a proper

posture."
   In early February 1956, the Russians tested a missile with a range of
900 miles, lending credence to a Time magazine cover story published
                        176        Secret       Empire


just a few weeks earlier. The article, which ran under the headline "Mis-
     siles Away," opened with an imaginary 1962 scenario in which the
United States and its allies find themselves militarily overmatched and
politically intimidated by Soviet missiles. Or as Time vividly put it,
"Russia has the whip hand at last." The magazine called the fictional hu-
          miliation "the nightmare of the missilemen."
   Nikita Khrushchev seemed to sense he had the Americans spooked.
On April 23, as the first detachment of U-2 spy planes was preparing to
move out to Britain, the Soviet leader boldly declared, "I am quite sure
that we will have very soon a guided missile with a hydrogen-bomb war-
     head which could hit any point in the world."
  Khrushchev might have been bluffing about his missiles, but the un-
            derlying threat of a Soviet surprise attack was reinforced at the White
House a few weeks later by a sobering letter from Killian, who had re-
          convened the Technological Capabilities Panel to update its assessment
of American vulnerability. Based on the latest intelligence estimates
about Soviet long-range bombers and nuclear weapons, Killian re-
        ported in a Top Secret letter to Arthur Flemming, the director of the
Office of Defense Mobilization, that his commission was moving up the
date when it believed Moscow would have the means to launch a devas-
       tating nuclear strike against the United States. Killian warned in the
May 14 letter that the threat was "imminent" rather than likely to mate-
      rialize in 1958, as the panel had predicted in its original report in early
1955. He wrote, "The period is rapidly approaching when the Soviets
could have the means to carry out a decisive surprise attack against the
United States."
   Despite the political pressure, Eisenhower held back on a decision to
use the U-2 when Allen Dulles came to the White House on May 28 to
discuss the spy plane with the president and seek his approval in princi-
     ple to commence operations. Eisenhower was not ready. He worried
about the consequences of sending an American spy plane, even one
that was not armed and not operated by the Air Force, deep into Soviet
airspace. He repeatedly told aides, "Such a decision is one of the most
soul-searching questions to come before a President. We've got to think
about what our reaction would be if they were to do this to us." Good-
                     Big Game          Hunting          177


paster knew the answer was that the United States would try to shoot
down the plane.
   Eisenhower realized the airplane and camera system marked a break-
         through inreconnaissance technology. If he harbored any doubts after
seeing the photographs of his Gettysburg farm, they were eliminated
when the CIA presented him with pictures of San Diego and several
other American cities taken from 70,000 feet. "On these we could easily
count the automobiles on the streets and even the lines marking the
parking areas for individual cars," he recalled in his memoirs. "There
was no doubt about the quality of the information to be obtained."
   But he also wanted reassurances that the plane would not be tracked
easily by Soviet radar or shot down by Soviet fighter jets. Test flights over
the United States had demonstrated that American radar could not con-
         sistently track the aircraft and many centers couldn't even spot it. The
CIA had repeatedly assured Eisenhower that Moscow's radar network,
built with equipment the allies had provided during World War II,
would not pick up the plane. But that assessment was unexpectedly re-
      vised during the spring of 1956. A new study, prepared by the Agency's
Office of Scientific Intelligence, said detection was probable. The secret
report was completed and published on May 28, the same day that Dulles
met with Eisenhower. But Eisenhower does not appear to have been in-
         formed about it. The CIA's own history of the U-2 simply notes that
"this study seems to have had little impact on the thinking of top project
officials." Citing a 1988 interview with Bissell, it goes on to say, "They
continued to believe that the Soviets would not be able to track the U-2
and might even fail to detect it, except for vague indications."
   Given Eisenhower's concerns, the Agency should have made him
aware of its revised assessment. It is possible that he would have held off
longer before ordering the first flight, or even aborted the program, had
he believed the plane would be easily detected. In his memoirs, Eisen-
       hower reported that, based on the information he was given about So-
     viet air defenses, he was confident that "in the then-existing state of
radar efficiency and the inability of fighter planes to operate at altitudes
above some fifty thousand feet, U-2 reconnaissance could be under-
      taken with reasonable safety."
                      178        Secret     Empire


   The CIA also told Eisenhower that in the unlikely event that one of
the planes was disabled by Soviet air defenses, there was little chance
that the pilot would survive and give Moscow irrefutable evidence that
the spy flight was an American operation. Dulles and Bissell assured
Eisenhower that a successful attack on the plane would kill the pilot and
destroy the aircraft beyond recognition. Goodpaster recalled, "We were
told — and it was part of our understanding of the situation — that it was
almost certain that the plane would disintegrate and that we could take
it as a certainty that no pilot would survive . . . and that although they
would know where the plane came from, it would be difficult to prove it
in any convincing way."
   Eisenhower was persuaded that the plane and its pilot would be
doomed if hit by a Russian missile or antiaircraft fire. "This was a cruel
assumption," he recalled in his memoirs, "but I was assured that the
young pilots undertaking these missions were doing so with their eyes
wide open and motivated by a high degree of patriotism, a swashbuck-
     ling bravado and certain material inducements."
  Just in case the dire predictions of destruction proved incorrect, the
CIA had decided to equip the pilots with suicide pills. Bissell asked Dr.
Alex Batlin of the Agency's Technical Services Division to come up with
an effective potion. Batlin proposed a glass ampoule of liquid potassium
cyanide, the same poison that Hermann Goering, the Nazi leader, had
used to kill himself in prison after the war. Once the glass was broken in
the mouth of a pilot, he would quickly expire. Bissell initially ordered six
ampoules, which were dubbed L-pills. Pilots would be given the option
of carrying one of the pills during flights over the Soviet bloc and would
not be ordered to use the poison.
   The instructions for use were chillingly simple.
  "When the ampoule is required to be used it should be put in the
mouth and held tightly between the teeth, with the lips tightly shut. The
ampoule should then be crushed between the teeth. The user should
then inhale through the mouth, shut the mouth again, and hold the
breath as long as possible. Unconsciousness will follow in a short time,
probably in about 30 seconds. It is expected that there will be no pain
                    Big Game       Hunting             179


but there may be a feeling of constriction about the chest. Death will
follow without consciousness being regained."
   The risk of accidental use didn't become clear until late in 1956, after
the first flights over the Soviet Union had been completed, when
Carmine Vito flew a U-2 over Bulgaria. While Vito was prebreathing
oxygen before the flight, one of the Air Force aides assigned to the U-2
detachment placed an L-pill in the right-hand knee pocket of Vito's
pressure suit, apparently unaware that the pilot liked to stuff Lemon
Drops into the same pocket to use to moisten his throat during the long
flights. Pilots could open their helmets very briefly during flight. Hours
later, while flying over Bulgaria, Vito unwittingly plucked the pill from
among the hard candies, opened the faceplate on his helmet, and
dropped it into his mouth. Fortunately, he did not bite down on the pill
when it failed to produce the lemon taste he expected. He spit it into his
hand. After learning of the incident, one of Bissell's aides ordered that
the pills should be kept in small boxes.
   The Agency was also slow to realize that the L-pill could kill a pilot if
it accidentally broke open in the airplane and filled the cockpit with
lethal gas. The pills were eventually replaced with an equally efficient
but less volatile killer, a small needle laced with algal, a shellfish toxin.
These deadly devices were precursors of the chemical and biological
weapons concocted by the Agency in the unsuccessful efforts to kill off
such unfriendly foreign leaders as Patrice Lumumba of the Congo and
Fidel Castro.
   As Eisenhower in late May was mulling over whether to use the U-2,
he was well aware that capture of the plane and pilot by the Russians
would be a propaganda triumph for the Kremlin. Moscow had had a
field day earlier in the year when it recovered dozens of balloons
equipped with cameras that the Air Force had launched into the jet
stream in hopes it would carry them over Soviet territory. The recon-
          naissance operation, called Project Genetrix, was designed to produce
the same sort of high-altitude photography as the U-2, in a safer if less
controlled way. Eisenhower approved the plan on December 27, 1955.
Over the next two months the Air Force sent 516 balloons into the skies
                        180        Secret      Empire


over Western Europe, figuring that they would sail over Eastern Eu-
      rope, the Soviet Union, and China. In theory, once the balloons crossed
into international airspace over the Western Pacific, the film canisters
would be recovered.
   Only forty-six balloon payloads were recovered. The rest either van-
       ished or were picked up by the Soviet Union and other Communist
countries. The Russians gleefully complained about the spy equipment,
which they called "espionage balloons," and exhibited a collection of
gasbags, cameras, and transmitters in Moscow. The Eisenhower admin-
               istration, previewing the cover story prepared for the U-2, lamely
claimed that the balloons were monitoring high-altitude weather condi-
      tions. Most of the world, including the Washington press corps, doubted
the explanation. Hanson Baldwin, the New York Times military corre-
           spondent, suggested to readers on February 19 that the administration's
account had seriously undermined the credibility of the government.
Baldwin wondered whether the potential military gains of the balloon
flights outweighed the political damage created by their discovery.
   Eisenhower concluded that they did not. He terminated the project,
saying that "the balloons gave more legitimate grounds for irritation
than could be matched by the good obtained from them."
   Surprisingly, General Twining had proposed another balloon pro-
      gram in mid-March, one that would involve higher-altitude flight paths.
Clearly irritated by the Air Force's persistence, Eisenhower responded
that he was "not interested in any more balloons."
   On May 3 1 , Dulles and Twining sent Eisenhower a formal proposal
for activating the U-2 . The heavily classified paper was entitled "Aqua-
tone Operational Plans." It called for making some preliminary flights
over Eastern Europe and then moving within a matter of weeks to an
initial series of missions over the Soviet Union. Eisenhower's review of
the proposal was suspended after his intestinal attack on June 7.
   While the president was recovering from emergency surgery, the
U-2 detachment in Britain moved to an air base in Wiesbaden, West
Germany. The change of scene was required because of an earlier espi-
        onage incident in Portsmouth harbor, outside London. During an April
visit to Britain by Khrushchev, a frogman for the British Admiralty, sent
                    Big Game        Huntinc;            181


to inspect the screws on a visiting Soviet cruiser, the Ordzhonikidze, was
intercepted and killed by the crew of the Russian ship. The headless
body of the frogman, Cmdr. Lionel Crabbe, floated ashore several days
later. When the botched spy mission was exposed, Prime Minister An-
        thony Eden dismissed the head of the British secret service. Fearing fur-
       ther embarrassment, he subsequently asked Washington not to use
Britain as a base for U-2 flights into Soviet airspace. John Foster Dulles,
Allen Dulles, and Bissell decided to ask Konrad Adenauer, the West
German chancellor, for permission to base the U-2 detachment in his
country. Adenauer approved the idea after Bissell flew to Bonn to brief
the chancellor and show him some of the test photographs of American
cities. The move to West Germany commenced on June 11.
   By this time, Bissell was impatient to start operational flights. Taking
advantage of existing presidential authority for Air Force flights over
Eastern Europe, he ordered the first U-2 mission over denied terri-
    tory— East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Poland — on Wednesday,
June 20. The operational plan presented to Eisenhower on May 31
mentioned such preliminary flights, but Bissell did not explicitly seek
the president's approval for them. Before sunrise on June 20, one of the
U-2 pilots, Carl Overstreet, took off from Wiesbaden and pointed his
plane toward the lightening skies in the east. He flew over the three So-
     viet bloc nations without incident, and two days later the photographs
from his flight were delivered to Washington for analysis. Arthur Lun-
dahl and his colleagues found the pictures to be of high quality.
  The day after Overstreet's flight, Killian and Land accompanied Bis-
    sell to the White House for a crucial meeting with Goodpaster, who was
representing the ailing president. The trio showed him some additional
U-2 pictures and outlined Bissell's plan to begin flights into Soviet air-
      space as soon as the weather was suitable. Goodpaster informed his vis-
    itors that Eisenhower had approved the operational plan of May 3 1 , but
that he wanted the first series of flights to be "designed to cover all that
is vital quickly." Goodpaster explained that this meant dispensing with
flights just inside the Soviet border and moving swiftly to deeper opera-
        tions. To avoid any misunderstanding about the degree of presidential
control, Goodpaster told Bissell that Eisenhower "must be contacted
                       182        Secret      Empire


before deep operations are initiated." The president also wanted regular
updates once the flights began. Goodpaster summarized the conversa-
     tion in a carefully worded memo that referred obliquely to the "recon-
           naissance project" without identifying its purpose or the existence of
theU-2.
  The four men also talked about possible problems, including the cap-
    ture or crash of the airplane. It was during this discussion that Killian
and Land questioned Bissell's plan to invoke the cover story about
weather research and to deny American responsibility for spying if the
U-2 was exposed. It was one of the few pieces of advice offered by Kil-
    lian and Land that was ignored.
  At last, Bissell had the hunting license he needed and was now just
days away from giving Eisenhower a date for the first flight over Soviet
territory. Bissell still had to inform Adenauer that such flights would
soon begin, and he had to wait until General Twining completed a visit
to Moscow, where he had been invited by Khrushchev to attend the
Moscow Air Show that opened on June 2 3 . Twining requested that no
overflights be conducted before his delegation exited the Soviet Union
at the end of the month.
   On July 2, Bissell authorized two more flights over Eastern Europe,
covering Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, East Germany, Poland,
and Bulgaria. That afternoon he and General Cabell, Dulles's deputy,
briefed Eisenhower. They described Carl Overstreet's June 20 flight.
Among other things, Eisenhower wanted to know whether Eastern Eu-
        ropean radar had tracked the U-2. Bissell reported there had been some
detection but that radar operators had mistakenly believed the plane
was flying at 42,000 feet, nearly 4 miles lower than its actual altitude.
Eisenhower, still concerned about detection, asked for additional infor-
        mation about the other missions over Eastern Europe. Bissell told
Goodpaster the weather over the European portion of the Soviet Union
was expected to clear and he wanted to start flying immediately.
  Goodpaster raised the request with Eisenhower on July 3 at Gettys-
     burg, where the president was recuperating. The president approved a
ten-day period for operations, beginning the next day. Goodpaster
called Bissell at 2 p.m. to tell him he had until July 14 to complete the
                   Big Game      Hunting            183


first series of overflights. Bissell, hoping to extend the window, asked if
he could interpret Eisenhower's decision to mean ten days of good
weather. "Absolutely not," Goodpaster replied. "It's ten calendar days,
period. You'll have to take your chances with the weather." Goodpaster
noted in another elliptical memorandum for the record that Bissell
agreed to provide interim reports about tracking and any attempted in-
terception.
   Bissell was not surprised by the limitations. "I believe Eisenhower
arranged things this way to keep our activities on a short leash. His idea
was that we should try to get two or three flights off in the next ten days
and then pause to assess the results. This proved to be sensible, as the
overflights were indeed an exceedingly sensitive act so far as the Soviets
were concerned."
   The flight plans for the first missions were devised by Bissell and his
aides in consultation with an interagency group that had been estab-
        lished inDecember 1955 at the suggestion of Land. The panel, known
as the Ad Hoc Requirements Committee, included representatives from
the Army, Navy, Air Force, and CIA and was chaired by James Q. Reber,
an experienced intelligence officer who had run the Agency's Office of
Intelligence Coordination for four years. The committee prepared a list
of collection requirements, including target lists that were considered
most likely to yield information about Moscow's long-range bombers
and missiles and its nuclear weapons program.
   The plans for the first two missions were audacious, to say the least.
As Bissell later told Michael Beschloss, his team had told him, "Let's
go for the big game the first time. We're safer the first time than we'll
ever be again." Mission 2013 called for entering Soviet airspace over
Belorussia, then swinging north to Leningrad to photograph several
military airfields and the naval shipyards where Soviet submarines were
built. The second flight, Mission 2014, would head straight to Moscow,
where the U-2 would pass over the factory where the Bison bombers
were being built, as well as the bomber test-flight center at Ramen-
skoye, where the big plane had first been sighted in 1953. The U-2
would also collect pictures of a missile plant and a rocket-engine center.
   Shortly before midnight in Washington, after weather forecasters
                       184        Secret     Empire


told Bissell the skies over the western Soviet Union were clear, he gave
final approval for Mission 2013. The decision was transmitted to Wies-
        baden on a secure transatlantic line. It was already light there on the
morning of Wednesday, July 4. Hervey Stockman completed prebreath-
ing and boarded one of Kelly Johnson's planes, which was innocuously
marked as NACA 187, consistent with the numbering system for planes
operated by the civilian aeronautical agency that was supposedly con-
        ducting the weather research flights. Bissell headed home to get some
sleep.
   Not long after Stockman entered Soviet airspace, he could tell his
plane had been spotted and was being tracked. He could see through the
downward-looking U-2 periscope that MiG fighters were swarming at
lower altitudes, then ascending toward his plane until they reached their
maximum altitude of 50,000 feet, when they would flip over and fall
back toward earth. "They were trying to snap up and tap me," Stockman
later said. The Soviet pilots couldn't get close enough to Stockman to
get off a threatening shot, but it was abundantly clear that the U-2 was
anything but invisible.
   By coincidence, Killian was among the first people to learn that the
Russians knew their airspace had been violated. He was in West Ger-
      many over the July 4 period, visiting an American eavesdropping station
operated by the National Security Agency. "I found there this group of
people who were listening in on what was happening in the Soviet
Union, baffled and astonished at what they were hearing." The radio
chatter they heard came from Soviet air defense forces trying to track
the U-2 . The American technicians were puzzled because the Russians
seemed to be talking about a plane that was flying at an abnormally high
altitude. "I didn't tell them what it was," Killian said.
   The timing of the flight seemed designed to humiliate Khrushchev,
who had decided to make a goodwill visit to the U.S. ambassador's resi-
        dence on America's Independence Day. Khrushchev was greeted at
Spaso House by Ambassador Charles Bohlen. The Soviet leader, un-
       aware that the U-2 was at that very moment flying over Leningrad,
toasted the health of President Eisenhower and wished the Americans a
happy holiday. Bohlen knew about the U-2 program, but had not been
                    Big Game       Hunting              185


told the maiden flight would take place that day. There is no indication
that Bissell knew about the Khrushchev visit to Spaso House when he
picked July 4 for the first flight.
   Khrushchev was furious when he learned about the intrusion, but
knew that for the moment he was powerless to shoot down the new
American aircraft because his military forces lacked planes or missiles
that could threaten the aircraft. Khrushchev's son, Sergei, later recalled,
"My father could not understand why the Americans did it on the
Fourth of July, because it was the second time in our postwar history
when all the Soviet leadership went to the American embassy" on Inde-
           pendence Day. Khrushchev told his son that he imagined that the State
Department and White House were "laughing" because the Russians
could do nothing to stop the plane.
  He was particularly piqued because he had just welcomed General
Twining to the Soviet Union. "We welcomed him as a guest and enter-
       tained him," Khrushchev later said. "He left our country by air and next
day sent a plane flying at great altitude into our country. . . . Only an an-
     imal like Twining would do its dirty business in the same place it eats."
   The next morning, Carmine Vito took off from Wiesbaden. He, too,
was pursued by Soviet defenders as he flew across Belorussia and headed
for Moscow. The capital was largely obscured by clouds. Like Stock-
      man, Vito returned unscathed to Wiesbaden.
   Bissell briefed Dulles about the flights when the CIA director re-
         turned to work after the holiday on July 5. When Bissell told him the
first missions had traveled over Leningrad and Moscow, Dulles was
stunned. "Oh, my Lord," he said, "do you think that was wise the first
time?"
   "Allen," Bissell replied, "the first is the safest."
   Eisenhower was anxious to know whether the U-2 had been detected.
Before the initial flights, he had instructed Goodpaster to advise Dulles
that the operation should be suspended "if we obtain any information or
warning that any of the flights has been discovered or tracked." On July
5, he repeated his concerns to Goodpaster and asked him to advise
Dulles "that if we obtain any information or warning that any of the
flights has been discovered or tracked, the operation should be sus-
                        186        Secret      Empire


pended." When Goodpaster checked with Dulles and Bissell that day,
they told him that reports about tracking and interception would not be
available for another thirty-six hours. When the two men met with
Goodpaster still later that day, they requested permission to make addi-
       tional flights. Goodpaster agreed further missions could be conducted,
based on his understanding that Eisenhower had authorized operations
"at the maximum rate until the first evidence of tracking was received."
   It is hard to believe that Bissell, at least, was unaware of the attempted
interception of the Stockman flight when he and Dulles talked with
Goodpaster by phone and in person on July 5. He may genuinely have
believed that more definitive information about the Soviet response was
needed before he informed the White House. But it seems more likely
that he wanted to squeeze in a few more flights before facing a presiden-
    tial order to suspend operations. If so, the failure to inform Goodpaster
and Eisenhower was virtually an act of insubordination.
   On July 6, the CIA reported that an analysis of Soviet radar coverage
revealed that the Russians had detected the U-2s and made several un-
           successful efforts to intercept them. But the data also showed that the
Soviet radar had not been able to track the planes over the entire course
of their flight and the Russians were unaware the planes had flown di-
       rectly over Leningrad and Moscow.
   Just when Eisenhower was told about this report is unclear. He
should have been informed immediately, but the record suggests he was
not. Because Soviet tracking had been intermittent, Bissell may have
figured he had yet to hit the red line that Eisenhower had established. At
any rate, he ordered three additional flights after July 6. There were two
missions on July 9, covering Eastern Europe, Belorussia, and the
Ukraine. The next day, another flight collected pictures of the Crimean
Peninsula, the site of a large Soviet naval base.
   BisselFs luck ran out on July 10. Early that day, Goodpaster and
Eisenhower still seemed to be operating under the impression that the
U-2s had yet to be tracked by the Russians. Goodpaster noted in a mem-
         orandum for the record that the president still wished to go ahead with
U-2 operations "until the first reporting of tracking was actually re-
       ceived." The same memo indicates that in a subsequent discussion, after
                   Big Game      Hunting             187


learning that there was some evidence of tracking, Eisenhower began to
entertain serious doubts about extending the flights through the full
ten-day period he had approved.
   After returning to Washington from Gettysburg that afternoon,
Goodpaster notified Dulles that Eisenhower was close to discontinuing
operations. Goodpaster reminded the CIA chief that the president was
mindful of how he would react "if they were to do this to us." Good-
       paster relayed the same information to Bissell.
  Eisenhower's fears were soon confirmed. That same day, the Kremlin
ended its diplomatic silence about the flights by sending a stiff protest
note to the American embassy in Moscow. It complained about over-
       flights made by a "twin-engine medium bomber of the United States Air
Force." The diplomatic note described the route of the Stockman and
Vito flights, though not their passage over Leningrad and Moscow,
which Russian radar had failed to detect. Though the Soviet Union
didn't realize initially that a radically new kind of spy plane had
breached its airspace, the Kremlin protest was enough for Eisenhower.
As soon as the diplomatic note reached the White House that evening,
Goodpaster called Bissell and instructed him to halt to U-2 operations
until further notice. If there were to be any future missions, Eisenhower
wanted much tighter White House control over the program.
   As Eisenhower was suspending the program, the first photographs
were beginning to reach Arthur Lundahl and his crew at the Steuart
Building. They were stunning. As soon as Lundahl's photo interpreters
examined film from the opening series of five flights over the Soviet
Union, it was clear there was no "bomber gap." The July flights covered
the nine major long-range bomber bases in the western portion of the
Soviet Union. Only a handful of Bison bombers were spotted at the
bases. Production of the plane was far more limited than Washington
had suspected. The Air Force estimate that Moscow already owned
nearly a hundred Bisons was simply wrong.
   Dick Leghorn's vision was vindicated. In just a handful of flights, a
high-altitude spy plane equipped with a high-powered camera system
had erased the fear that the Soviet Union was racing ahead of the
United States in the development of heavy bombers. Just as James Kil-
                       188        Secret      Empire


lian and Edwin Land had promised, advanced technologies had made it
possible to see through the Iron Curtain. Based on the new information,
Eisenhower could quietly but confidently hold down military spending
in some areas, especially in the production rate of America's new long-
range bomber, the B-52.
   Virtually overnight, Kelly Johnson's ungainly airplane and Jim
Baker's remarkable cameras had made the cold war less combustible and
had inaugurated a new era in espionage at the edge of space. These were
signal achievements. Looking back on the U-2 after his retirement,
Eisenhower said the program "produced intelligence of critical impor-
      tance to the United States."
   "Perhaps as important as the positive information — what the Soviets
did have — was the negative information it produced — what the So-
     viets did not have," the former president wrote. "U-2 information de-
          prived Khrushchev of the most powerful weapon of the Communist
conspiracy — international blackmail — usable only as long as the Soviets
could exploit the ignorance and resulting fears of the Free World."
   But in July 1956, as Eisenhower marveled at the first wave of photo-
        graphs from the U-2, he was already moving to limit future flights over
the Soviet Union. On July 19, Allen Dulles presented the president with
startlingly clear and detailed pictures of various Russian sites, including
the Winter Palace in Leningrad. To Bissell, the images showed that "we
can take pictures of Moscow and Leningrad and they can't lay a mitt on
us." To Eisenhower, however, they were also a symbol of a delicate
diplomatic problem. The United States was flouting international law
and deliberately violating Soviet airspace. Had the plane, as promised,
eluded detection, there might have been few potential complications.
But that was no longer the case.
   Eisenhower complained to Dulles that the Agency had assured him
that "not over a very minor percentage of these [flights] would be picked
up," and bluntly told the CIA director he had "lost enthusiasm" for the
U-2 program. If Moscow were to run similar flights over the United
States, he said, "the reaction would be drastic." He was also concerned
about adverse public reaction in the United States if Americans discov-
     ered their government was so openly violating international law. "Soviet
                    Big Game       Hunting              189


protests were one thing; any loss of confidence by our own people
would be quite another."
   Eisenhower told Dulles, "We'd better stand down more or less indef-
        initely. Don't start again until you get permission." In the future, the
president said, he would no longer grant approval for an unlimited
number of flights over a certain period, but would instead insist that
every flight plan be submitted to him for review. Bissell's secret air force
was not going to get much work over its primary target. In fact, from
Hervey Stockman's flight on July 4, 1956, to Francis Gary Powers's
flight on May 1, 1960, the U-2 was used only twenty- four times for
flights over the interior of the Soviet Union.
   The fact that it was used at all after the July 1956 flights reflected the
still urgent need for additional intelligence about Soviet forces, particu-
     larly Moscow's missile projects. Almost as soon as he realized Eisen-
       hower was disillusioned with the plane, Bissell asked Land if it would be
possible to make the aircraft less susceptible to detection. Edward Pur-
cell, the Harvard physicist who had worked with Land on the Killian
committee, came up with some novel ideas about how to evade radar,
and Bissell soon funded a classified project in the Boston area. It was, in
effect, one of the first efforts to produce a stealth airplane. The tech-
        niques proposed by Purcell to deflect or absorb radar pulses proved ei-
     ther ineffective or impractical — some of Purcell's ideas were tried out
on the U-2 but made the plane harder to fly. Kelly Johnson was not
happy with the outside meddling and made his disgust clear by calling
modified versions of the U-2 "dirty birds."
   The paradoxical nature of the U-2 was not lost on Johnson, Land, or
the other men involved in its development. The intelligence benefits
produced by the plane were invaluable, but the risks of using the aircraft
over Soviet territory were great. To take full advantage of the advances
in aerial reconnaissance, the United States needed to fly higher and
faster. The U-2 was a transitional aircraft. Kelly Johnson would have to
build something better. He was already working on it. But the ultimate
answer, as Land knew, was to take America's reconnaissance operations
into space.
     PART   THREE




Vaulting into Space
     1956-1976
                            CHAPTER           TEN




                          Earthbound


Outer        space beckoned, but as the U-2 went into service in July
        of 1956, the United States wasn't anywhere close to putting a spy
satellite into orbit. In fact, the government was still struggling to de-
        velop reliable rockets and missiles, and the prospect of actually lofting
any sort of object into orbit, even an empty tin can, seemed dismayingly
distant. Had the Eisenhower administration taken a comprehensive
look at the state of satellite development programs in mid- 1956, it
might have realized that it was stumbling rather than racing to place a
reconnaissance system in space. That realization, unfortunately, did not
come until more than a year later.
   Washington did not lack for satellite proposals or even active pro-
        grams. As Hervey Stockman sailed over Leningrad on July 4, 1956, the
Air Force was secretly working on an ambitious satellite project that was
the direct descendant of RAND's 1954 "Project Feed Back" report. The
Navy, in conjunction with the National Academy of Sciences, was
openly preparing to build a research satellite that would be sent aloft by
the Navy's Vanguard rocket. Though the public did not know it, the sci-
        entific satellite was intended in part to clear the way for the military
satellite by establishing the principle of freedom of space, the as-yet-
untested doctrine that terrestrial laws, including traditional claims of
sovereign airspace, did not extend into space. The Eisenhower adminis-
        tration knew this novel legal issue was pivotal. If the Soviet Union or
other nations asserted that their restricted national airspace extended
above the atmosphere, the operation of any kind of satellites, whether

                                      193
                        194        Secret      Empire


civilian or military, would be impeded and years of diplomatic wran-
       gling could be expected before the legal issues were resolved.
   But for the moment these potential problems remained purely theo-
        retical because the satellite programs were hobbled by a lack of coordi-
          nation, resources, and proven technologies. The Air Force had yet to
come up with a photographic system that could capture detailed images
from space and transmit them back to earth. The fault, ironically, rested
in part with RAND, which had worked so hard to get the government to
take satellites seriously. In their devotion to the concept, RAND re-
           searchers such as Bob Salter, Jim Lipp, and Mert Davies had pointed the
Air Force toward electronic technologies that the nation had not yet
mastered. With the trickle of money coming from the Pentagon, the Air
Force and its main contractor, Lockheed, weren't likely to overcome the
technical challenges anytime soon. Meantime, the Kremlin had mobi-
      lized Russian scientists and engineers to beat the United States into
space, correctly sensing that such a spectacular achievement would bur-
     nish the Soviet Union's image as a progressive, scientifically advanced
nation and create the impression that it had eclipsed America in science
and technology.
  Without rockets, of course, there could be no satellites, and the
American rocket program in 1956 was just beginning to pick up mo-
          mentum. For nearly a decade after World War II, it had suffered from
military turf battles that dated back to the war years, when the United
States set out to produce its own rockets and missiles, inspired by the ex-
      ample of Nazi Germany's V-2 rockets. Though the German weapons
were inaccurate, the rocket attacks on Britain that commenced in late
1944 signaled the advent of a new era in warfare. Edward R. Murrow,
the intrepid CBS correspondent, told the world about the rockets in a
broadcast from London on November 12, 1944. "The significance of
this demonstration of German skill and ingenuity lies in the fact that it
makes complete nonsense out of strategic frontiers, mountain and river
barriers. And, in the opinion of many able scientists, it means that
within a few years present methods of aerial bombardment will be as ob-
       solete as the Gatling gun. It serves to make more appalling the prospect
or the possibility of another war. "
                         Earthbound                795


  Before the V-2 made its terrifying debut, the U.S. Army had been ex-
         ploring rocket technologies, working with scientists at Caltech and en-
        gine rs at the General Electric Company. Sadly, the pioneering work of
Robert Goddard provided little basis for this wartime research, not be-
      cause Goddard's experiments were disappointing — quite the contrary —
but because his later achievements were little known. After his early,
well-chronicled success with liquid-fuel rockets near his Massachusetts
home in the 1920s, Goddard had moved his operations to an isolated
ranch outside Roswell, New Mexico. There he found the privacy and
secrecy he prized, but he all but disappeared from sight. Though God-
       dard conducted forty-eight test flights during fifteen years at the ranch,
from 1930 to 1945, his obsession with secrecy prevented wide circula-
     tion of his ideas.
  As the war in Europe wound down in early 1945, the Army realized
the quickest way to energize its rocket program was to ship home a
boatload of V-2 rockets and the men who had built them. Col. Gervais
Trichel, who headed the Ordance Department's Rocket Development
Branch, dispatched an aide to Europe with orders to assemble a list of
top German rocket scientists. This mission soon grew into a concerted,
clandestine effort to transfer German engineers and rocket equipment
to the United States after the war, a pragmatic but morally repugnant
program that eventually brought dozens of former Nazi supporters to
America. The bargain behind Project Overcast and Project Paperclip,
as the migration was successively code named, was simple enough. If the
Germans put their expertise to work building American rockets and
missiles, their association with the Nazi regime would be forgiven.
Wernher von Braun, the technical director of the Nazi ballistic missile
program, was the most prominent, and came to play a high-profile role
in the American space program. The Soviet Union conducted a parallel
effort after the war, bringing dozens of other German rocket scientists
to Moscow.
   By October 1945, the first group of Germans was based at the White
Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, a desolate area north of El Paso,
Texas, that was already the Army's primary missile test site. Von Braun
himself was settled at Fort Bliss in El Paso. At White Sands, the Ger-
                        196         Secret      Empire


mans helped assemble dozens of V-2 rockets from more than 360 metric
tons of components that the United States had secretly spirited out of
Germany just days after the war ended. By May 1946, German rockets,
which had been designed to terrorize Londoners, were thundering into
the sky over the San Andres and Sacramento Mountains in southeast
New Mexico. The cold-blooded decision to make use of the Nazi rocket
engineers was a fitting model for the kind of cold war calculations that
often put Washington in league with foreign tyrants and brutal security
forces. Unlike many of those cases, the use of the Germans ultimately
enhanced American security.
   Von Braun and his colleagues were not the only source of missile
technology. The Army Air Forces commissioned more than two dozen
missile projects involving six aircraft companies. One of the programs —
Convair's Project MX-774 — involved preliminary work on a ballistic
missile with a range of 5,000 miles.
   Worried that guided missiles would become the exclusive domain of
the Army, the Navy initiated its own rocket program in 1945 and
quickly added an element that had not occurred to the Army: develop-
          ment of a satellite. The Navy's Committee for Evaluating the Possibil-
   ity of Space Rocketry concluded that a "satellite rocket" could be placed
in orbit around the earth once adequate propulsion systems were de-
            vised. But when the Navy proposed in March 1946 that the Army Air
Forces join in a cooperative effort to produce such a satellite, the offer
was turned down. The architect of the rejection, Maj. Gen. Curtis
LeMay, who had recently become deputy chief of research and develop-
       ment for the Air Staff, moved quickly to initiate a separate satellite plan.
He hired the Douglas Aircraft Company in El Segundo to study the
possibilities, and in so doing started the sequence of events that led to
the creation by Douglas and the Air Forces of Project RAND and the
preparation of its first report in May 1946, "Preliminary Design of an
Experimental World-Circling Spaceship."
   Unfortunately, the postwar boom in rocket and missile research was
short-lived. Concerned about inflation and undisciplined federal spend-
      ing, the Truman administration soon started cutting the Pentagon
                          Earthbound                 197


budget, and the missile and satellite projects were among the first casu-
       alties. Project MX-774 was canceled, as were ten other missile pro-
        grams. LeMay asked RAND to prepare a more detailed design study on
satellites, anticipating that the next step would be assigning develop-
       ment work to an aircraft company. It was delivered on February 1 , 1947.
But the scarcity of funds and the air service's preference for airplanes
prevented further action, despite Lipp's fervent appeal to move ahead at
once with a satellite.
  The missilemen also faced doubts about the technology itself, espe-
     cially the idea of long-range missiles that could span continents and
oceans. Vannevar Bush, Franklin Roosevelt's leading science adviser,
had caught the mood accurately in late 1945 when he said of interconti-
      nental ballistic missiles, "I say technically I don't think anybody in the
world knows how to do such a thing and I feel confident it will not be
done for a long period of time to come." As of 1948, the Pentagon had
set aside all research and development work on satellites and the newly
created independent Air Force, which wanted more bombers, was fund-
    ing just four missile projects.
   This attitude lingered in Washington until the development of the
hydrogen bomb in 1952 and the arrival of Trevor Gardner, Donald
Quarles, and other technologically minded men at the Pentagon. The
Strategic Missile Evaluation Committee, headed by John von Neu-
        mann, reported in February 1954 that thermonuclear warheads could
be designed to be small and light enough to fit aboard a long-range mis-
     sile. The group strongly urged the government to accelerate its missile
development programs.
   The impact of the report could soon be seen in the performance spec-
          ifications setfor long-range missiles. In 1951, in a halfhearted effort to
get back in the missile business, the Air Force had initiated a new missile
program, providing just $500,000 to contractors to begin work on what
was to be called the Atlas missile. The missile was to carry a 10,000-
pound payload and strike a target 5,000 miles away with a very high de-
     gree of accuracy. Once the committee confirmed the possibility of a
smaller warhead, engineers scaled back the payload weight for intercon-
                       198        Secret      Empire


tinental missiles to 3,000 pounds and widened the margin for accuracy
because of the greater explosive power of hydrogen warheads as com-
      pared to atomic warheads.
  The Air Force intensified work on the Atlas in 1954 and created a
separate administrative unit within the Air Research and Development
Command to manage the Atlas program. The new organization, the
Western Development Division, was headquartered in a former school-
house in Inglewood, on the western edge of Los Angeles not far from
the city's main airport. The missile test site was located at Point Ar-
guello, a vacant, windswept stretch of the California coast north of
Santa Barbara. When the initial commander, Maj. Gen. James McCor-
mack, retired, the Air Force gave the job to General Schriever. He as-
        sumed command in June 1954, determined to arm the nation as quickly
as possible with advanced missiles that could strike anywhere in the
world.
   Like Richard Bissell, who five months later would be given responsi-
       bility for building the U-2, Schriever believed in crisp decision-making
and minimal bureaucracy. He soon transformed the Inglewood opera-
     tion into a creative, effective management organization that dispensed
with the Air Force's cumbersome contracting procedures and paper-
      work. One of his first and most unconventional decisions was to ask two
civilian experts, Simon Ramo and Dean E. Wooldridge, to coordinate
the technical work, a move that essentially trumped the usual Air Force
chain of command on research and development projects. Ramo and
Wooldridge, who had met as doctoral students at Caltech, were already
well known in the nascent aerospace world as the designers of sophisti-
       cated electronic systems for Hughes Aircraft Company and the
founders in 1953 of the eponymous Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation,
which would merge with Thompson Products, a Cleveland auto-parts
company, to become TRW. The two men had served as members of von
Neumann's committee. Working with Schriever, Ramo-Wooldridge
provided the technical direction for the American missile program.
TRW    later became a prime contractor for building satellites that moni-
      tored Soviet radio communications.
  Schriever also got his bosses in Washington to make it clear that mis-
                         Earthbound                199


siles were the service's number one development project. That message
was strongly reinforced by the White House after the Killian committee
recommended in February 1955 that the Air Force proceed briskly with
its missile effort, though the group wrongly predicted that the United
States would not likely assemble a full arsenal of the weapons before
1965. "The development of such a missile requires the solution of a set
of truly awesome technical problems," the panel found. "Its size alone is
a problem; the atmosphere re-entry is a totally new problem; the firing
of each test missile will probably represent an operation of great magni-
       tude. Anumber of test firings will be required in the development of the
missile." The committee recommended that "the development of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (with about 5,500 nautical miles range
and megaton warhead) continue to receive the very substantial support
necessary to complete it at the earliest possible date." Once Schriever
got the missile program running at full speed, with an industrial base to
match, he would guide one program after another from conception to
operation, including the Atlas, Titan I and II, and the solid-fuel Minute-
man ICBM's. Because of Schriever's energetic leadership, the country
overcame its feeble initial efforts to produce an array of long-range mis-
     siles bythe early 1960s.
  Sixteen months after taking over the Western Development Division,
Schriever inherited the Air Force's sole satellite project, an orphan offi-
      cially known as Weapon System- 1 1 7L, or WS- 1 1 7L in Air Force short-
        hand. The program was the offshoot of RAND 's Project Feed Back. The
project called for incorporating a reconnaissance satellite into the sec-
     ond stage of a two-stage rocket, using the Atlas missile as the first-stage
booster. The satellite itself was to contain a Kodak camera system that
would produce photographs on which large objects like airplanes would
be visible. The exposed film would be automatically processed aboard
the satellite, the resulting pictures would be scanned electronically, and
the video signal would be radioed to earth much like a television broad-
     cast. The stream of electronic data would then be transformed back into
a photographic image.
  The design was inventive, but the ambitious technical goals were ac-
      tually crippling. The number of images that could be transmitted to
                          200         Secret      Empire


earth were limited by the radio bandwidth and data transmission rate, as
well as the short time that the orbiting satellite would be in radio range
of ground stations as it rotated around the earth. To compensate for the
meager number of pictures that could be relayed daily, the satellite
would need to remain in orbit for a year or more. That required a high
orbit of 300 miles to reduce the atmospheric drag that would erode the
orbit of a lower- flying satellite. But the orbit altitude would make it
harder to produce detailed pictures, and the extended lifetime of the
satellite would require equipping it with a heavy load of film.
  The project had grown slowly from the March 1, 1954, RAND re-
     port to an Air Force research program to the full-fledged development
program run out of Wright Field that was authorized on March 16,
1955, in a document blandly entitled "System Requirement (No. 5) for
an Advanced Reconnaissance System." A secret 1962 Air Force history
summarized the expectations for the early satellite system. "In many re-
        spects, as might have been anticipated, it paralleled the earlier RAND
studies. It defined as the Air Force objective a means of providing con-
           tinuous surveillance of 'preselected areas of the earth' in order 'to deter-
      mine the status of a potential enemy's warmaking capability.' Intended
for launch from fixed bases, the reconnaissance satellite was to provide
daylight visual coverage in sufficient detail to permit identification of
airfield runways and intercontinental missile launch stations."
   The transfer of authority from Wright Field to Inglewood in Octo-
     ber 1955 was logical. For one thing, the heavy reconnaissance satellite
needed a powerful booster to lift it into orbit, and the Atlas was the most
promising candidate. For another, Schriever had long been a supporter
of the satellite project and had used his influence at the Pentagon to
press for its development. More than any other general officer in the Air
Force, Schriever appreciated the potential uses of space. With his con-
         nections toLeghorn and Land, his openness to new ideas, and his faith
in science and technology, Schriever was the ideal steward for the
WS-117L. Over time, the WS-117L project would encompass several
different intelligence-gathering systems, including infrared sensors de-
        signed todetect Soviet missile launches.
   But even Schriever was stymied by technical and funding problems.
                         Earthbound                201


Electronic technology for transmitting high-resolution images back to
earth in a data stream was not yet perfected — and would not be for two
more decades. The drawbacks were compounded by a shortage of
money. Though the Air Force had formally endorsed the project, it pro-
      vided minimal funding. After studying design proposals submitted by
four companies — Lockheed Missile Systems Division, Bell Telephone
Laboratories, Glenn L. Martin Company, and RCA — Schriever and his
team designated Lockheed as the prime contractor on October 29,
1956, almost four months after President Eisenhower was informed
that the Russians could track the U-2. The choice of Lockheed was po-
         etically just— the two prime authors of the Project Feed Back report,
Jim Lipp and Bob Salter, had moved to Lockheed along with several
other top RAND officials. But because of budget restrictions, Lockheed
had to cut the pace of work down to just one-tenth of the level it had
planned. At that rate, the first working satellite would not be in opera-
     tion until well after the already distant target date of March 1960.
  In truth, the Pentagon was barely keeping the program alive. Gard-
    ner was gone, and Schriever was on the West Coast, where it was more
difficult for him to lobby for satellite funds. Air Force leaders in Wash-
         ington remained doubtful that the satellite pictures would be of much
use in pinpointing Soviet military targets. With the White House and
Congress leaning on the Air Force to produce missiles, and the White
House trying to hold down defense spending, the Air Force was content
to devote most of its space budget to missiles.
   The idea of a reconnaissance satellite was also overshadowed by the
administration's highly publicized goal of putting a civilian scientific re-
       search satellite in orbit no later than 1958. This project proved doubly
damaging. It deflected attention and support away from the reconnais-
        sance project, which was all but frozen for several years. More impor-
     tant, the ill-conceived project, specifically its reliance on a questionable
Navy rocket, gave the Russians the opening they needed to beat the
United States into space. The whole scheme was one of the greatest
miscalculations of the cold war.
  The research satellite plan grew out of a discussion among a group of
American and British scientists in 1950 at the Silver Spring, Maryland,
                        202         Secret      Empire


home of physicist James Van Allen. Eager to encourage high-altitude
research work around the world, the men came up with the idea of stag-
     ing an international scientific exercise in 1957-58, a time that would co-
            incide with unusually high solar activity and come twenty-five years
after the last such global effort, the 1932 International Polar Year. The
meeting at Van Allen's home eventually led the International Council of
Scientific Unions to obtain the approval of sixty-seven nations to desig-
      nate 1957-58 as the occasion for a new round of cooperative research
that was called the International Geophysical Year (IGY). Some of the
same space scientists who had gathered at the Van Allen home recom-
         mended in 1952 that the launching of a research satellite be identified as
one of the main goals of the IGY. The International Council approved
the objective at a meeting in Rome in October 1954, with the assent of
both Russian and American scientists.
   Subsequently, the National Academy of Sciences, a society of the
nation's top scientists, and the National Science Foundation, an inde-
          pendent government agency established in 1950 to promote and fund
scientific research, worked together in 1954 and 1955 to gain White
House approval for an American civilian satellite project. The adminis-
        tration welcomed the proposal, but not for the high-minded reasons
cited by the scientists. To the White House and Pentagon, the research
satellite looked like a fine way to achieve several national security objec-
        tives, namely beating the Russians into space and demonstrating that
use of the heavens would be governed by the freedom-of-space prin-
ciple.
  The Killian panel had unambiguously outlined the overlapping inter-
    ests in its February 1955 report. In part five of the classified report, the
section dealing with intelligence issues, Edwin Land's task force as-
        sessed the potential uses of satellites. "We are convinced that small, in-
                    expensive satellites can have several important uses related to
intelligence. First, careful observations of the motions of the satellites
would give, directly, much information about friction in the extreme
upper air, and about fine details of the shape and gravitational field of
the earth. This information is wanted for the design and guidance of
long-range ballistic missiles and would be useful for the design of large
                            Earthbound                  203


satellites for intelligence purposes. Second, even a lightweight satellite
might be constructed to open into an extended structure (resembling a
bedspring) which could be an effective reflector for very-high-
frequency radio and radar signals. Conceivably, this could have applica-
       tions in communication and in intelligence. Third, the new prestige
that the world will accord to the nation first to launch an artificial earth
satellite would better go to the U.S. than to the USSR. And although it
is clear that a very small satellite cannot serve as a useful carrier for re-
                connaissance apparatus, cameras, etc., it can serve ideally to explore or
establish the principle that space, outside our atmosphere, is open
to all."
   Part five ended with a set of twelve recommendations, including: "In-
            telligence applications warrant an immediate program leading to very
small artificial satellites in orbits around the earth. Construction of
large surveillance satellites must be deferred until adequate solutions
are found to some extraordinary technical problems in the information-
gathering and -reporting system and its power supply; and should wait
upon development of the ICBM rocket-propulsion system. The ulti-
      mate objective of research and development on the large satellite should
be continuous surveillance that is both extensive and selective and that
can give fine-scale detail sufficient for the identification of objects (air-
          planes, trains, buildings) on the ground."
   With these conclusions still fresh in their minds, administration offi-
      cials threw their support behind the civilian satellite proposal while
carefully masking their ulterior interests from the public. The decisive
moment came on Thursday, May 26, 1955, when Eisenhower presided
over a meeting of the National Security Council. The participants in-
       cluded Vice President Richard Nixon, Secretary of State John Foster
Dulles, Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson, Allen Dulles from the
CIA, and a slew of top military officials. The scientific satellite plan was
the central item on the agenda, spelled out in a draft policy statement la-
       beled NSC 5520. Eisenhower was headed to Geneva in less than a
month for the four-power disarmament summit where he would make
his "Open Skies" proposal. The notion of launching a research satellite
ostensibly for the benefit of mankind must have meshed well with
                        204         Secret      Empire


Eisenhower's growing interest in trying to seize the moral high ground
in Geneva.
  The secret policy paper listed more than half a dozen reasons to ap-
       prove the satellite project, including the Pentagon's expectation that a
5- to 10-pound satellite could be launched into orbit by 1957-1958 by
adapting existing rocket components. The document recalled the Kil-
lian committee recommendations and noted that top Soviet scientists
were believed to be working on a satellite program. It also stressed the
potential "prestige and psychological benefits" that would likely flow to
the first nation in space. "The inference of such a demonstration of ad-
         vanced technology and its unmistakable relationship to intercontinental
ballistic missile technology might have important repercussions on the
political determination of free world countries to resist Communist
threats, especially if the USSR were to be the first to establish a satel-

   Nelson Rockefeller, a presidential assistant who dealt with psycho-
 lite."
        logical warfare issues, bluntly underscored that point in a letter that ac-
                  companied NSC 5520 and was distributed to the members of the
council. Rockefeller wrote, "The stake of prestige that is involved makes
this a race that we cannot afford to lose."
  The policy paper plainly described the potential military and intelli-
        gence benefits of the non-military satellite. "From a military standpoint,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff have stated their belief that intelligence applica-
       tions strongly warrant the construction of a large surveillance satellite.
While a small scientific satellite cannot carry surveillance equipment
and therefore will have no direct intelligence potential, it does represent
a technological step toward the achievement of the large surveillance
satellite, and will be helpful to this end so long as the small scientific
satellite program does not impede development of the large surveillance

satellite."
   Donald Quarles, the assistant secretary of defense for research and
development, described the satellite program to Eisenhower and the
council members. The president observed at one point that the satellite
was a minor affair, but that the nation would be getting into "the big
stuff" if it eventually put up a reconnaissance model.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower (with Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet
leader, during a visit to Camp David in 1959) secretly ordered the CIA to build
new spy planes and satellites that could gauge Soviet military strength and
warn Washington if the Kremlin was preparing a surprise nuclear attack. The
technologically advanced projects changed the nature of espionage by creating
powerful new machines that could collect more intelligence in a day than an
army of spies could gather on the ground in a year. Eisenhower's faith in
science was a hallmark of his presidency.
                                                                       Edwin H. Land, the inventor of
James R. Killian Jr., the president of MIT, urged                      instant photography, spotted
Eisenhower to develop radical new military tech-                       promising new spy systems such
         nologies to reduce the threat of surprise attack.             as the U-2 at an early stage and
                                                                       guided their development.




Trevor Gardner, a combative Air Force
                                                             Richard S. Leghorn, a World War II recon-
official, prodded the Eisenhower ad-                                     naissance pilot, anticipated the need for the
               ministration tobuild missiles and other       U-2, the supersonic A- 12 spy plane, and the
modern weapons systems.                                      first reconnaissance satellites.
James G. Baker (left), a Harvard astro-
       nomer, designed the camera used in the
U-2 to photograph Soviet military sites.
A number of Bison bombers are visible
at an airfield near Moscow (below), pho-
            tographed bythe U-2 in 1956.
Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson (above),
Lockheed's virtuoso airplane maker,
with the U-2, the high-flying spy plane
he produced ahead of schedule and
under budget.
                1           (^^sk
                        I




10




     Eisenhower's audacious technological goals were achieved with critical help
     from three government officials.
     Richard M. Bissell Jr. (top left), better known for his direction of CIA covert
     operations, nimbly managed the spy plane and satellite projects for the Agency
     even though he had no aviation or aerospace background.
     Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (top right), who led the Air Force into space, gave
     critical institutional and technical support to the intelligence projects.
     Arthur C. Lundahl (bottom) created the CIA photography interpretation center
     that gleaned vital information from the flood of photographs produced by the
     new reconnaissance systems.
The launch, orbiting, and recovery
of the first reconnaissance satellites
required an exquisitely precise
sequence of events, beginning with
the countdown at the Corona launch
pad at Vandenberg AFB on the
California coast (right). The camera
system, film, and recovery capsule,
which was designed to withstand the
withering heat of reentry as it
plunged through the atmosphere
with a load of exposed film, were
housed in an Agena rocket that also
served as a second-stage booster.
(The recovery sequence is depicted
below.) The Agena sat atop a Thor
missile, which powered the space-
      craft off the launch pad.
President Eisenhower marks the arrival at the White House of the first film cap-
     sule recovered from space on August 11,1 960. Because the flight was primarily
diagnostic, no film was sent aloft. Instead an American flag was placed in the cap-
      sule. Eisenhower is flanked in the Oval Office ceremony by (left to right) Air Force
Secretary Dudley C. Sharp, Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates, Air Force Chief
of Staff Thomas D. White, and Lt. Col. Charles "Moose" Mathison.
An April 1963 photo taken by a Corona satellite shows a Soviet nuclear- weapons
production plant near Sverdlovsk.
                                                               .




James W. Plummer (left) managed the Corona satellite project for Lockheed.
Albert D. "Bud" Wheelon (right) created a new CIA directorate of science and
technology in 1963 and initiated work on a new generation of advanced spy
satellites. He also worked with Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson to overcome
technical problems with the A- 12 supersonic spy plane. The Air Force model
(below) was known as the SR-71 Blackbird.
The most advanced photo reconnaissance satellites in operation today, orbiting
several hundred miles above the earth, can show objects on the ground as small
as a football. This image shows the damage inflicted at the Al Sahra Airfield in
Iraq by American warplanes in December 1998. Holes in the roof of the
hangar are visible, as are several aircraft and a number of people. For security
reasons, the degraded image, made public by the Defense Department, does
not show the full magnification power of the satellite.
                         Earthbound                205


  Henry Cabot Lodge, the chief American representative to the U.N.,
warned that the administration would have to be careful in handling its
announcement about the project, evidently concerned that world opin-
     ion might turn against Washington if the government appeared to be
trying to militarize space. Quarles reassured Lodge that the auspices of
the International Geophysical Year would shield the United States from
criticism.
   As the discussion wound down, Eisenhower invited his aides to regis-
    ter any objections to the plan. There were none. After Allen Dulles em-
               phasized the importance of the project, no one present could have
misunderstood its potential implications for intelligence gathering. The
National Security Council endorsed the paper and the next day the
president officially approved the plan. It would ultimately call for
launching six satellites, plus the construction of ground stations to track
their movement around the earth.
   As Lodge had suggested, presentation of the project to the public
would be a sensitive matter. Rockefeller proposed at the NSC meeting
that the announcement be made at the United Nations. That was in

keeping with the policy paper's recommendation that "the United
States should emphasize the peaceful purposes" of the project. In the
end, the White House itself was selected as the appropriate venue. On
Friday, July 29, 1955, the administration unveiled its plan at a White
House news conference attended by a battery of prominent scientists.
James Hagerty, the White House press secretary, told reporters, "On
behalf of the president, I am now announcing that the president has ap-
        proved plans by this country for going ahead with the launching of small
unmanned earth-circling satellites as part of the United States partici-
        pation inthe International Geophysical Year. . . . This program will, for
the first time in history, enable scientists throughout the world to make
sustained observations in the regions beyond the earth's atmosphere.
The president expressed personal gratification that the American pro-
      gram will provide scientists of all nations this important and unique op-
        portunity forthe advancement of science."
   When Hagerty was asked if the project was linked to any satellite
plans the Pentagon might have, he replied, "The only connection the
                        206         Secret      Empire


Department of Defense will have with this project is actually getting
these satellites up in the air."
   The splashy announcement grabbed the nation's attention. "U.S. To
Launch Earth Satellite 200-300 Miles Into Outer Space; World Will
Get Scientific Data," the New York Times proclaimed in a large front-
     page headline on July 30. Another front-page story, this one by Anthony
Leviero, about the scientific purposes of the satellite noted two func-
      tions that it would not be able to perform:
   "It will have no utility for gaining terrestrial data that might be used
as part of President Eisenhower's Geneva plan for inspecting the mili-
      tary establishment of the United States and Russia.
   "It will not be able to drop nuclear weapons, or anything else for that
matter, for use against a hostile country."
   With American prestige now tied emphatically to the space race, the
administration had to come up with a rocket that could put the Ameri-
    can satellite in orbit. Inexplicably, it had no clear plan. To make matters
worse, the White House emphasis on the peaceful purposes of the satel-
     lite, and the Pentagon's desire not to divert money from its missile pro-
             grams, drove the administration away from one of the most obvious
launch vehicles, the Atlas. A review of rocket options led by Homer
Stewart of the Jet Propulsion Lab produced a grievously flawed plan
that doomed America's chances of getting a satellite into orbit before
the Russians.
  The Stewart committee had three choices. The Air Force reluctantly
proposed use of the Atlas, but made clear that might distract engineers
from their main goal of building a missile rather than a booster for a
satellite. The two functions were not entirely complementary. It re-
         quired less power but better guidance systems to fire a missile into space
and direct it to a target halfway around the world than to lift a satellite
into orbit. The Atlas or any other missile would need to be joined with a
second- and possibly even a third-stage rocket engine to achieve the ve-
      locity necessary to carry a payload into orbit. In the summer of 1955, the
Air Force also couldn't guarantee that the Atlas would be fully tested
and ready for use by the end of 1958.
  That left the Army and Navy, both of which still had their own missile
                          Earthbound                  207


programs, carryovers from the projects they had initiated after World
War II. The Army offered use of the Redstone rocket, which von Braun
and his team had developed in the early 1950s after they ran out of V-2
rockets and moved from El Paso and White Sands to the Army's Guided
Missile Center at Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Red-
      stone was a liquid-fuel rocket about 30 percent more powerful than the
V-2 and considerably lighter. It was the first in a series of increasingly
powerful boosters that later included the Saturn rockets that would
carry Americans to the moon. With the use of two or three solid-fuel
Sergeant rockets as upper stages, the Redstone, in theory, could propel
a small satellite into orbit. In fact, the Office of Naval Research and
Redstone Arsenal had proposed a joint satellite project in 1954 based on
a similar plan. The project was called Orbiter.
   The Navy, for its part, urged the Stewart committee to select its
Viking rocket, the product of a program the service had inaugurated to-
      ward the end of 1946 when the Naval Research Lab contracted with the
Glenn L. Martin Company to build a research rocket to carry scientific
payloads into space. The first Viking was launched on May 3, 1949,
climbing to an altitude of 50 miles. Like the Redstone, it would need
supplemental stages to achieve orbital velocity.
   On August 3, the Stewart committee by a divided vote selected the
Viking. The Army team in Huntsville hotly protested the decision. Maj.
Gen. Leslie Simon, the Army's assistant chief of ordnance for research
and development, complained in a memo on August 1 5 that the Viking
plan was laced with errors and based on an unrealistically rosy set of ex-
           pectations about development of the rocket system. With some simple,
inexpensive modifications, he said, the Redstone would be ready for the
first orbital flight in January 1957 if the Pentagon immediately ap-
         proved the Army proposal.
   The Huntsville appeal was unsuccessful. Walter A. McDougall, a
University of Pennsylvania professor and chronicler of the space race,
suggested in his 1985 book, . . . The Heavens and the Earth, that von
Braun's rocket was slighted to avoid the taint of Nazi science. He sur-
       mised that the administration did not want to give the Russians any ad-
            ditional excuse to challenge the free passage of an American satellite in
                         208         Secret      Empire


space. McDougall reported that Washington was so concerned about
von Braun's involvement that Army inspectors traveled to Cape
Canaveral when the Jupiter-C, a variant of the Redstone, was later un-
      veiled tobe sure that the Germans were not trying to outflank the Navy.
The Jupiter-C was used to test newly invented missile nose cones that
were designed to survive reentry through the atmosphere. The Army
high command feared that if von Braun equipped the rocket with addi-
     tional stages rather than mock-ups, it could put a nose cone in orbit.
  The sensitivity about the Germans may have made for good diplo-
     macy, but the rejection of the Redstone ignored the clear technical ad-
             vantages ofthe Army rocket. While the Navy program, which was
named Project Vanguard, floundered, the Redstone rapidly progressed
to the point where launch of a satellite seemed within reach. In Septem-
     ber 1956, a Jupiter-C soared far into space, reaching a record altitude of
682 miles. With the addition of a live upper stage, it would likely have
reached orbital speed. The Vanguard, by contrast, was beset with prob-
       lems, including unexpectedly high costs, which quickly eroded Penta-
     gon support for the project. With a long shopping list of new missiles,
bombers, and missile-carrying nuclear submarines, the Defense De-
              partment was unenthusiastic about subsidizing a civilian satellite proj-
    ect, even one that had important military implications. The lack of
support for the Vanguard program was evident when the Glenn L. Mar-
    tin Company, the prime contractor for Vanguard, moved many of its top
rocket engineers from Baltimore to Denver in late 1955 to work on the
more profitable Titan missile program.
  As evidence accumulated in 1956 that Vanguard was falling far be-
     hind schedule, and the CIA reported that the Soviet space program was
advancing rapidly toward launch of a satellite, the administration stub-
         bornly stuck by the Navy rocket. Looking back through the documen-
     tary record, it seems clear that despite all the earnest discussion about
the potential propaganda benefits of being first in space, many officials
failed to appreciate how traumatic a Soviet victory would be for the
United States. Much of the administration, in effect, seemed to buy the
illusion it had sold to the world, namely that the United States was en-
        gaged ina noble scientific experiment, not a rank race with the Russians.
                           Earthbound                 209


   There were exceptions. In late April 1956, William Y. Elliott, an aide
at the White House Office of Defense Mobilization, forwarded a report
to one of Eisenhower's senior aides pointing out that "it might be in the
national interest" to piggyback a satellite on a Redstone during tests ex-
        pected to take place in January 1957. The report had been prepared by
David Z. Beckler, the executive secretary of the Office of Defense Mo-
            bilization's Science Advisory Committee. In his memo to William H.
Jackson, a special assistant to the president, Elliott noted that Beckler
had recently returned from a visit to the Vanguard test site "with a feel-
    ing that the Navy may fall so far behind the schedule that we will suffer
a serious psychological setback."
   Citing State Department anxieties about a Russian victory in the
space race, Elliott told Jackson, "I think you are aware of the high psy-
            chological importance attached by State to getting this into the air on
time, at least, particularly because of its obvious connection to our capa-
        bilities for an intermediate range ballistic missile, vis-a-vis the capability
of the Soviet system."
   But for the most part, common sense was a casualty of myopic think-
     ing. On June 22, 1956, Homer Stewart advised Donald Quarles of some
developing problems in the Vanguard program, including a shortage of
qualified technical experts at the Naval Research Lab who could set
specifications and coordinate the work of subcontractors. But Stewart
discounted the "minor delays" and reiterated his view that Vanguard
could make the 1958 IGY deadline. Once again, he rejected the idea of
switching to the Redstone, even though he noted that by January 1957 it
might well be ready to put a 17-pound satellite into orbit.
  In a politically obtuse observation, he warned Quarles that the suc-
       cessful launch of a satellite in the opening weeks of 1957 would actually
be a grave mistake. "Such a flight would not fulfill the nation's commit-
      ment for the International Geophysical Year because it would have to be
made before the beginning of that period," Stewart wrote. "Adequate
tracking and observation equipment for the scientific utilization of re-
     sults would not be available at this time. Moreover, any announcement
of such a flight (or worse, any leakage of information if no prior an-
             nouncement were made) would seriously compromise the strong moral
                       210       Secret     Empire


position internationally which the United States presently holds in the
IGY due to its frank and open acts and announcements as respects Van-

  A few weeks later, E. V. Murphree, a top Pentagon missile adviser,
 guard."
made the same argument to the deputy secretary of defense, Reuben B.
Robertson Jr. "While it is true that the Vanguard group does not expect
to make its first satellite attempt before August 1957, whereas a satellite
attempt could be made by the Army Ballistic Missile Agency as early as
January 1957, little would be gained by making such an early satellite at-
     tempt as an isolated action with no follow-up program."
  Some of the scientists working on the Vanguard project acknowl-
      edged the delays in an appearance before a House subcommittee in the
spring of 1957. When their testimony was published by the subcommit-
    tee on May 19, John W. Finney of the New York Times reported that the
planned launch date was being put off from September until sometime
the following spring. His front-page story added, however, that the
satellite program was "beset by so many uncertainties that the scientists
still do not have any definite idea when the small sphere will be shot on
its earth-circling trip through space."
   The Russians were happy to report a few weeks later that their satel-
     lite plans were advancing briskly. The president of the Soviet Academy
of Sciences, Aleksandr Nesmeyanov, announced at the end of May that
Russian scientists "have created the rockets and all the instruments and
equipment necessary to solve the problems of the artificial earth satel-
       lite." On June 10, Nesmeyanov predicted that Moscow would launch a
satellite "within the next few months." In case anyone in Washington
had missed the Soviet statements, a group of Russian scientists outlined
the launch schedule again late in June at an international meeting in
Brussels.
  On August 26, the Kremlin startled Washington by announcing that
it had successfully tested an intercontinental ballistic missile. In his dis-
      patch from Moscow, Max Frankel of the New York Times reported, "The
announcement said the missile, flying at an 'unprecedented' altitude,
had 'covered a huge distance in a brief time' and had 'landed in the tar-
                            Earthbound                   277


get area.' It added that the results showed a missile could be directed
'into any part of the world.' "
   Frankel continued, "If the report is true, the Communist world has
won what has been considered a crucial race for the perfection of a pi-
lotless rocket capable of traversing the earth."
   While the Eisenhower administration was still pondering the conse-
                quences ofthe Soviet missile test — Secretary of State Dulles publicly in-
       sisted itdid not change the military balance of power between East and
West — the Russians delivered a mighty blow to American prestige. On
Friday, October 4, the Soviet Union won the first phase of the space race
by placing a 184-pound satellite named Sputnik into orbit 550 miles
above the earth. Moscow had not only beaten the United States, with its
vaunted technology, into space, but it had done so with a satellite that
was fifty times heavier than the satellite Washington was still struggling
to get off the ground.
   The news ricocheted around the world faster than the Soviet satellite.
The huge banner headline stripped across the top of the New York Times
said: "Soviet Fires Earth Satellite Into Space; It Is Circling The Globe
at 18,000 M.P.H.; Sphere Tracked In 4 Crossings Over U.S."
   The Russian breakthrough upended assumptions about American su-
           periority inscience and technology and seemed in an instant to reshape
the cold war in Moscow's favor. But it also jolted the Eisenhower ad-
             ministration into action on a variety of space programs, and brought
Killian and Land back to the White House. Working with ideas pro-
       posed byMert Davies from RAND and Richard Leghorn, who was still
proselytizing for strategic reconnaissance, and assisted by General
Schriever, they soon gave new impetus to the development of a recon-
           naissance satellite, this time under the direction of Richard Bissell and
the CIA.
                        CHAPTER             ELEVEN




                    Creating Corona

Sputnik was a humiliating defeat for the United States — per-
           haps the darkest hour of the cold war — but it was also a transform-
   ing event in American life. It gave new urgency and energy to the
nation's space programs and stirred new interest — and federal sup-
     port— in the fields of science and education that rippled through Amer-
      ican society for the rest of the century. In the cloistered world of secret
military research projects, Sputnik was a galvanizing development that
soon brought an infusion of new dollars and high-level interest. Just
three days after learning of the Soviet satellite, President Eisenhower
pressed the Pentagon about its efforts to develop a spy satellite.
  From the vantage point of the twenty-first century, and the knowl-
    edge that the United States prevailed in the cold war, landed men on the
moon, and surged far ahead of the Soviet Union in science and technol-
     ogy, itis difficult to appreciate the apprehension that Sputnik gener-
       ated. In a single stroke, the Soviet Union seemed to have overtaken the
United States not only in science but also in military technology, partic-
          ularly in the new and potentially decisive arena of space. The impres-
      sion of inferiority was compounded later in the fall of 1957 when the
first American effort to put a satellite in orbit ended disastrously on the
launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, as the rocket exploded in a giant
fireball two seconds after firing.
   "As it beeped in the sky," James Killian later recalled, "Sputnik I cre-
       ated a crisis of confidence that swept the country like a windblown for-
    est fire. Overnight there developed a widespread fear that the country


                                      272
                     Creating       Corona             213


lay at the mercy of the Russian military machine and that our own gov-
           ernment and its military men had abruptly lost the power to defend the
homeland itself, much less to maintain U.S. prestige and leadership in
the international arena. Confidence in American science, technology,
and education suddenly evaporated."
   The impact was no less dramatic abroad. The United States Informa-
     tion Agency plainly described it shortly after Sputnik began its space
odyssey. The agency's office of research and intelligence reported that
American prestige had "sustained a severe blow." It said: "Soviet claims
of scientific and technological superiority over the West and especially
the U.S. have won greatly widened acceptance. Public opinion in
friendly countries shows decided concern over the possibility that the
balance of military power has shifted or may soon shift in favor of the
USSR." The head of the agency, George V. Allen, would later report to
Congress that Americans themselves "seemed confused, dismayed and
shaken by the developments."
   The Senate's two most outspoken Democratic critics of Eisenhower
administration defense policies, Henry Jackson and Stuart Symington,
immediately bludgeoned the White House for the setback. Jackson
called the Soviet satellite "a devastating blow to the prestige of the
United States as the leader in the scientific and technical world."
Symington said Sputnik "is but more proof of growing Communist su-
         periority inthe all-important missile field." He added, "If this now
known superiority over the United States develops into supremacy, the
position of the free world will be critical."
   Though Symington probably didn't realize it, his grim analysis was
shared by a panel of distinguished scientists that was nearing comple-
     tion of a review of Soviet missile programs for Allen Dulles. After
reviewing intelligence data about the performance of Soviet intermedi-
           ate-range missiles, weapons that could easily reach American and
NATO bases in Western Europe, the scientists concluded that "the
country is in a period of grave national emergency." Their report, which
was delivered to Dulles later in October, found that the Russian missile
tests showed "an unusually high reliability in launchings" and "an ex-
                         214         Secret      Empire


tremely high proficiency in guidance components." The panel in-
         formed Dulles that "U.S. experience in ballistic missiles does not match
that of the USSR and in our opinion is lagging by two to three years."
   The sense of alarm was not limited to Democrats or scientists, nor
was it restricted exclusively to matters of rocket technology. Sputnik left
many Americans concerned that the country had become flabby and
complacent. Senator Styles Bridges, a New Hampshire Republican,
caught the mood the day after the Kremlin announcement when he
said, "The time has clearly come to be less concerned with the pile on
the new broadloom rug or the height of the tail fin on the new car and to
be more prepared to shed blood, sweat and tears if this country and the
free world are to survive."
   Eisenhower and his aides, badly misreading the public reaction, ini-
      tially tried to brush off the Soviet feat as a scientific curiosity. The pres-
         ident, who was informed about Sputnik on Saturday morning at his
Gettysburg farm, left the administration's first response to James
Hagerty, the White House press secretary. After consulting on the
phone with John Foster Dulles, Hagerty minimized the significance of
the Soviet achievement, lamely telling reporters that the launch was
nothing to worry about. "We never thought of our program as one
which was in a race with the Soviets." He insisted that the Russian satel-
    lite would have no effect on the American program.
   Over the next few days, top officials continued to disparage the
launch. At his farewell news conference, outgoing Secretary of Defense
Charles Wilson called Sputnik "a nice scientific trick." Sherman Adams,
the White House chief of staff, said Washington did not intend to com-
     pete in "an outer space basketball game." Another White House aide,
Maxwell Rabb, declared that the satellite was "without military signifi-
             cance." Killian later dryly described these comments as "flip and inade-
      quate in the face of the crisis."
   The military implications of Sputnik were actually extremely serious,
as Eisenhower and many of his top advisers well knew. He conceded as
much in his memoirs. "The Soviet scientific achievement was impres-
       sive," he recalled. "The size of the thrust required to propel a satellite of
this weight came as a distinct surprise to us. There was no point in try-
                      Creating         Corona             215


ing to minimize the accomplishment or the warning it gave that we
must take added efforts to ensure maximum progress in missile and
other scientific programs."
   Killian put it more bluntly. "The capacity to lift a satellite ninety or a
hundred miles above the surface of the earth, and place it into orbit,
ominously suggested a capacity to lift a nuclear bomb into the upper at-
          mosphere and send it hurtling down upon its target of choice." Though
he knew that the American missile program was advancing, and that a
Jupiter-C rocket, a more powerful version of the Army's Redstone, had
blasted into space in August with a new nose cone that survived the fiery
descent back to earth, Killian realized that the Russians had broken

ahead in the critical area of long-range weapons. "Whatever the respec-
     tive strengths of the two economies, theirs for the moment apparently
led the world in its capacity to produce intercontinental ballistic mis-
       siles, however crude they might be."
   The Pentagon's first technical assessment of Sputnik, written by
Donald Quarles and sent to the president on October 7, found that "the
satellite success does indicate competence in long-range ballistic mis-
     siles and does tend to corroborate their ICBM claim of August 27."
That was putting it mildly. Quarles clearly felt defensive about the Van-
        guard program, which looked incompetent in light of the Russian ac-
                      complishment. He reminded Eisenhower that the administration had
deliberately set the Navy satellite program on an independent course to
avoid interference with other missile programs and that the administra-
    tion had hoped that "scientific satellites, which would be non-military
and clearly inoffensive, might help to establish the principle that outer
space is international space."
   "The military participation in rocketry," he told Eisenhower, "was
de-emphasized as being incidental to the scientific program. All subse-
       quent public releases have followed the same line."
   Quarles urged Eisenhower to downplay the Soviet missile advantage
in any public statements, as Hagerty had already done over the weekend
in his comments to reporters. Quarles attached a draft White House
statement with his secret report to the president. It said, in part, "As to
the implication that the Soviet satellite launching indicates that their
                       276        Secret     Empire


military rocketry is more advanced than our own, it should be noted that
the rocketry being employed by our Naval Research Laboratory for
launching the Vanguard satellite is separate and distinct from our ICBM
and IRBM ballistic missile rocketry." While technically correct, this
dodged the essential point that American missiles could not match the
thrust or reliability of Russian models.
   Quarles also proposed that the White House take the offensive on
freedom of space by citing Sputnik as a precedent. His draft statement
noted "that none of the many nations that have been overflown by the
Soviet satellite appears to have raised objection on the ground that its
territorial rights have been infringed. This seems to establish the valid-
    ity of the concept that outer space is international in character." That
was true, and the flight of Sputnik effectively settled the issue of space
law in favor of open heavens, though debate about the matter went on
for years in various international forums, including the United Nations.
   Although government officials had long been pondering the legal is-
     sues associated with space vehicles, the subject was a novelty for many
Americans. The level of unawareness was evident in the questions posed
at the beginning of a New York Times story by Walter Sullivan that ap-
         peared on the front page on Sunday, October 13. "Is the Soviet earth
satellite trespassing on the air space of all nations? If the sky is the limit
of national sovereignty, how high is it? Who pays if a United States
satellite falls on Westminster Abbey?"
   Sullivan reported that "specialists in international law have differing
ideas on the proper answers to some of these questions."
   Eisenhower met with Quarles and an assortment of other officials
early on Tuesday morning, October 8, to discuss the Russian satellite. In
what must have been an uncomfortable encounter for Quarles, Eisen-
         hower opened the meeting by pointedly asking whether it was true, as
he had heard, that the Redstone could have placed a satellite in orbit
months earlier. Quarles said the report was correct, but recalled that the
administration had decided upon the advice of outside scientists not to
make the United States scientific satellite program a military project. If
Eisenhower wished to change that approach and order the Army to get
a satellite into orbit as quickly as possible, Quarles said, the Redstone
                    Creating       Corona            217


would be ready to launch in four months — still a month ahead of the
Navy's target date. The president impatiently replied that Congress was
certain to ask why Redstone had not been selected long ago. Though
Eisenhower had endorsed the Vanguard plan in 1955, he suspected that
competition between the military services had impeded the American
satellite program and the Pentagon's efforts to develop intermediate
and long-range missiles. He did not air this concern in the meeting with
Quarles but brought it up repeatedly in subsequent discussions with
Pentagon officials.
   In the Tuesday morning meeting, Eisenhower turned to the future,
asking the group to look ahead five years. He specifically inquired about
the possibility of developing a reconnaissance satellite. Quarles de-
           scribed the Air Force's development project, WS-1 17L. Andrew Good-
paster's minutes of the meeting do not indicate whether Quarles told
the president that the project lacked adequate funding and was strug-
      gling with technologies that would be hard to perfect.
   Later that same day Eisenhower reviewed military budget issues for
the last time with Charles Wilson, who would soon be replaced as de-
       fense secretary by Neil H. McElroy, the president of Procter & Gam-
    ble, the consumer products company. The meeting dwelled on missile
programs, and the president approved Wilson's recommendation to re-
       move overtime restrictions that the Pentagon had imposed on contrac-
     tors to hold down costs. Even in the wake of the Soviet launch,
Eisenhower told Wilson to make sure the elimination of the overtime
cap was handled carefully so that expenses would not snowball. The
men also agreed that the Pentagon should consider the Redstone as a
possible alternative to the Vanguard if the Navy satellite project contin-
     ued to falter.
   Eisenhower did his best to mask the administration's concern about
the momentous military issues raised by the Russian satellite when he
faced the press on Wednesday, October 9. The president was almost as
dismissive of Sputnik as Wilson, Adams, and Rabb had been, essentially
offering a variation of the theme that the military and scientific implica-
       tions were relatively unimportant. Speaking at a packed news confer-
      ence that was unusually combative by the mild-mannered journalistic
                        218        Secret      Empire


standards of the day, Eisenhower said that for all its efforts, the Soviet
Union had succeeded only in putting "one small ball in the air." While
he said he was concerned that the United States was not "further ahead"
in the production of intercontinental ballistic missiles, and acknowl-
        edged that the Russians had developed powerful rocket engines, he
showed no inclination to accelerate the American missile or satellite

programs. The president's theme, mapped out with his advisers along
the lines of Quarles's memo of the previous day, was that Washington's
scientific satellite project needed no tweaking, let alone rethinking, and
that the delay in launching the satellite did not reflect weaknesses in the
nation's missile programs. Under persistent questioning about the mili-
     tary implications of the Russian launch, he offered the memorable ob-
           servation that Sputnik did not raise his concern about the nation's
security "by one iota."
   The president so thoroughly belittled the issues that he left the im-
          pression he did not fully comprehend the political or military signifi-
        cance of the Soviet breakthrough in space. Eisenhower's shaky
performance was emblematic of the administration's wobbly response
to the Russian triumph. For the first time in his presidency, Eisenhower
seemed in danger of losing the public's faith in his leadership on na-
       tional security matters. As Killian observed, "He was startled that the
American people were so psychologically vulnerable. The president had
enjoyed the respect and confidence of the people to a degree that has
not been common in this century, and he had come to expect that his
own statements would be received by that public with some degree of
confidence. But now, it seemed, he was confronted with the possibility
that this confidence would be eroded."
   The New York Times editorialized the next day that the administra-
       tion's handling of missile and satellite programs revealed "an unex-
        pected naivete" about the political and propaganda benefits of winning
the space race. The paper exhorted Washington and the nation to "wake
up to the necessities of the new age of space that has dawned upon us."
   Lyndon Johnson, the Senate majority leader, saw the administration's
conduct as a failure of historic dimensions. "The Roman Empire con-
        trolled the world because it could build roads. Later, when moved to sea,
                        Creating         Corona               219


the British Empire was dominant because it had ships. In the air age, we
were powerful because we had airplanes. Now, the Communists have
established a foothold in outer space. It is not very reassuring to be told
that next year we will put a better satellite into the air. Perhaps it will
even have chrome trim and automatic windshield wipers." Johnson
worried that by gaining control of the "high ground" of space, the So-
    viet Union would ultimately control the world.
   Eisenhower took up the subject of spy satellites again on Thursday at
a full-dress meeting of the National Security Council that had been
called to review the technological and military implications of Sputnik.
"The outer space implications of the launching of this satellite," Quar-
    ks told the group, "were of very great significance, especially in relation
to the development of reconnaissance satellites." Eisenhower wanted to
know if newspapers were correct in reporting that some American intel-
             ligence officials believed Sputnik was taking pictures of the United
States. Quarles said he doubted the small satellite was equipped with a
camera system, but could not be certain. Eisenhower's question was an
indication of how little he knew at this point about the technological
hurdles associated with trying to develop a sophisticated photorecon-
naissance system that was compact and sturdy enough to fit into a satel-
     lite. Sputnik was far too small to accommodate intelligence-gathering
equipment.
   When the discussion turned to the state of the nation's missile pro-
        grams, Eisenhower reiterated his long-standing concerns about turf
battles among the military services. While agreeing that the Air Force
and Army should continue working on their primary missile projects,
the president said it might eventually be necessary to consolidate these
and other rocket operations under a single development organization
similar to the wartime Manhattan Project that produced the atomic
bomb. Eisenhower cautioned Pentagon officials that they must con-
      stantly bealert to the dangers of interservice rivalries.
  With the administration under mounting pressure to demonstrate
that it appreciated the military potential of space, Aviation Week dis-
       closed on Sunday, October 13, that the Air Force was working on a mul-
                        timillion-dollar program to develop a reconnaissance satellite. The
                         220         Secret      Empire


story, picked up by other new organizations, accurately described the
WS-117L project and outlined the technical obstacles, including the
need to devise a workable system to transmit the pictures back to earth.
The New York Times front-page story on Monday, October 14, was
headlined "U.S. Working on Satellite That Could Film the Earth —
Program Is Reported Under Way Since Early 1956 — First Unmanned
'Moon' Would Use TV or Regular Cameras."
  The news coverage meant that after more than ten years of study by
RAND and several years of preliminary developmental work by the Air
Force, the concept of a photoreconnaissance satellite was receiving na-
       tional attention for the first time. Ironically, the burst of publicity un-
              dermined the project by bringing it into the open just at a moment when
Washington was not eager to broadcast its plans to use space for military
purposes.
   As doubts about the quality of American science swirled about the
capital, Eisenhower welcomed Killian, Land, and other members of the
Science Advisory Committee of the Office of Defense Mobilization to
the White House on October 15. The late-morning meeting, which
turned into a two-part session with an unexpected excursion to the Pen-
       tagon, proved to be one of the most important of the Eisenhower presi-
        dency. It elevated science to an unparalleled level of importance in
Washington and led to the appointment of Killian to a newly created
post of White House science adviser. From that perch, Killian, with
Land's help, could cut through the Pentagon's bewildering array of
technology projects to single out the most promising, urgently needed
intelligence programs like spy satellites and ensure that they received
adequate support.
  Accounts of the meeting by some of the participants, including
Eisenhower and Killian, as well as the handwritten notes made during
the gathering by Robert Cutler, the president's national security adviser,
describe the broad scope of the discussion, and the eloquence of some of
the speakers, especially Land. The meeting, in effect, gave science a seat
at the highest policy-making levels of the government.
   Eisenhower welcomed the committee members by saying that he was
surprised by the feverish public reaction to Sputnik. "I can't understand
                      Creating       Corona              221


why the American people have got so worked up over this thing," he
quipped. "It's certainly not going to drop on their heads." The president
then asked the group if it thought "American science was being outdis-
tanced."
  I. I. Rabi, the committee chairman and Columbia University physi-
     cist whom Eisenhower had befriended while running the university,
noted that the United States enjoyed advantages in some areas but
warned that the Russians had "picked up tremendous momentum." He
said that unless the United States took vigorous action, "they could pass
us swiftly just as in a period of twenty to thirty years we caught up with
Europe and left Western Europe far behind."
  Rabi then invited Land to speak, perhaps an indication that the two
men had agreed before the meeting that Land would make some obser-
       vations about the place of science in American life. Land, one of the
youngest members of the advisory committee but also the only one who
ran a large industrial company, spoke with assurance and authority as he
cast the challenge in the broadest terms. "The country recognizes it
needs much from science and science needs the president," Land said.
Under the Soviet system, he told Eisenhower, Russians were "learning
to live the life of science and its application. They are pioneering as we
did years ago. Science is becoming to them a way of life."
   Land suggested that Americans had paused to enjoy the benefits of
science. Now the country needed to "begin a rebirth of building, using
the mind, enjoying the scientific adventure. Otherwise Russian scien-
      tific culture will leave us behind as a decadent race. The country no
longer feels the thrill of the scientific life."
   The president, Land said, was uniquely positioned to inspire the
country to renew its enthusiasm for science by "setting our youth on a
variety of scientific adventures." He concluded that the United States
"must be made into a scientific country if it will survive."
   Killian described Eisenhower's response: "The president was not
sure that the Russians were seeking to educate their people so com-
        pletely inscience as Land had implied, but it was clear that he was im-
         pressed byLand's plea that he could, as an act of intellectual leadership,
create a more widespread understanding of science." Goodpaster noted
                         222        Secret       Empire


for the record, "The president said he would like to encourage an atti-
      tude toward science similar to the enthusiasm that was inspired by ath-
     letic endeavors in his youth."
  Rabi then urged Eisenhower to appoint a full-time White House sci-
      ence adviser and a board of science consultants. The president ex-
          pressed interest in the idea and instructed Goodpaster and other aides
to pursue the suggestion. As the meeting progressed, Eisenhower de-
      cided he wanted his new defense secretary to hear from the scientists.
Without breaking for lunch, the members of the advisory committee re-
           convened at the Pentagon in the early afternoon to meet with McElroy
and his top aides.
   On Saturday, November 2, as the White House was pulling together
plans for the appointment of a science adviser, the Soviet Union
stunned Washington again by launching into orbit a second, much
heavier satellite that carried a small, shaggy dog named Laika. Weighing
more than 1,100 pounds, six times heavier than the first, the second
satellite demonstrated even greater Soviet superiority in the develop-
       ment of powerful rockets. It set off speculation among top scientists that
the Russians might have achieved a breakthrough in propulsion tech-
        nology. British scientists suggested that Moscow had produced a new
chemical fuel or perhaps even a nuclear engine. If so, they said, it would
not be long before the Soviet Union launched a rocket to the moon.
The New York Times even reported in a front-page story that numerous
foreign scientists thought a Russian rocket might already be headed for
the moon, carrying a hydrogen bomb timed to detonate while the moon
was darkened briefly in eclipse, creating a flash that would be brighter
than the light of a full moon.
   It was little wonder that Washington was reeling. Though Moscow
had announced its intention to put up another satellite, the size of the
spacecraft added to anxieties and stoked the political battle over Eisen-
         hower's handling of the American missile programs. Lyndon Johnson
and other Senate Democrats immediately renewed their call for a con-
             gressional investigation of missile and satellite projects to determine
why the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union. Senator
Richard Russell, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, de-
                      Creating       Corona             223


scribed Sputnik II as "a very dramatic demonstration of Soviet achieve-
         ments" and said it was "time for us to end our complacency."
   The level of public interest in the Soviet space feats was worrying to
officials in Washington. The day after Laika started her journey into
space, a long line formed outside the Hayden Planetarium at the Mu-
       seum of Natural History in New York, waiting to see a show that in-
            cluded information about satellites and featured a recording of the
electronic beeps produced by the new Soviet satellite as it circled the
earth. With the Pentagon's satellite plans still limping along, the best
the administration could say to reassure Americans was that Washing-
      ton's first satellite might be launched in December. Anyone familiar
with the Vanguard program knew that that was an optimistic expecta-
     tion. With Eisenhower's blessing, McElroy quietly gave the Army ap-
        proval to act on its long-standing ambition to vault a satellite into orbit
aboard the Jupiter-C rocket. McElroy said the Army program would
"supplement" the Navy effort, but the real expectation in the adminis-
       tration was that von Braun and his team would beat the Navy into space.
  To help allay public fears, Eisenhower addressed the nation from the
Oval Office on Thursday, November 7. With the Army's new heat-
defeating missile nose cone placed theatrically next to his desk, the pres-
       ident announced the appointment of Killian to the newly created post of
special assistant to the president for science and technology and said he
had ordered administrative changes at the Pentagon to speed the devel-
        opment ofmissiles.
   He then assessed the nation's military strength. "It is my conviction,
supported by trusted scientific and military advisers, that, although the
Soviets are quite likely ahead in some missile and special areas and are
obviously ahead of us in satellite development, as of today the over-all
military strength of the free world is distinctly greater than that of the
Communist countries. We must see to it that whatever advantages they
have are temporary only."
   "Killian's appointment marked a major step forward for American
science," Robert A. Divine, a historian at the University of Texas, noted
in his book about Eisenhower's response to Sputnik. "For the first time,
a man who spoke for the nation's leading scientists was given a position
                       224        Secret      Empire


of unquestioned national authority." With Eisenhower's approval, Kil-
lian, in turn, elevated the status of the Office of Defense Mobilization's
Science Advisory Committee by adding prominent new members and
renaming it the President's Science Advisory Committee. Land agreed
to continue serving on the board.
   The enduring impact of Eisenhower's October 1 5 discussion with the
scientists was evident in other ways. He tried to rally the country from
its shock over Sputnik with a series of nationally televised speeches on
science and defense, urged Congress to increase funding for scientific
research and education, and pushed the Pentagon and private industry
to press ahead with their work on missiles and satellites. The negotia-
       tions with Congress led to enactment of the National Defense Educa-
     tion Act, a landmark bill that provided money for college scholarships,
foreign-language instruction, and the training of math and science
teachers.

   Unexpectedly, one of the first opportunities to advance America's
space programs came from the Air Force's reconnaissance satellite proj-
     ect. The missile nose cone that survived reentry through the atmo-
          sphere inAugust held the potential for a critical design change in the
satellite system. Eisenhower had emphasized the importance of the
nose cone during his November 7 Oval Office address to the nation.
"One difficult obstacle on the way to producing a useful long-range
weapon is that of bringing a missile back from outer space without its
burning up like a meteor because of friction with the earth's atmo-
         sphere," hetold the American people. Pointing to the nose cone by his
desk, Eisenhower said, "Our scientists and engineers have solved that
problem. This object here in my office is an experimental missile — a
nose cone. It has been hundreds of miles to outer space and back. Here

it is, completely intact."
    The implications of the new technology for a photoreconnaissance
satellite were striking, though they went unmentioned by Eisenhower.
Instead of trying to beam images back to the ground with unproven
electronic technologies, engineers could build a simpler satellite that
sent a recoverable capsule packed with exposed film down to earth.
Though still technically daunting, the idea looked far more practical




                                                                                   i
                     Creating       Corona             225


than the television-based system at the core of the WS-1 17L project,
which was languishing for lack of Air Force financial support. Once
Land and Killian recognized the possibilities, they intervened, using
their extraordinary influence to transform the spy satellite project from
a backwater program into one of Washington's top priorities.
   The concept of a recoverable satellite — actually only one component
of the satellite, a small capsule containing exposed film, would be recov-
     ered— was not entirely new. Richard C. Raymond, a RAND physicist,
had explored the idea in 1956, working with his own prior calculations
about the potential advantages of a film-return system and the latest re-
       search on reentry technologies. Raymond figured that a film recovery
satellite would yield twice as much data as an electro-optical satellite,
which would be hobbled by the primitive state of transmission tech-
         niques and the lower resolution of the camera planned for the Air Force
satellite. Based on Raymond's analysis, RAND submitted a secret report
to the Air Force in March 1956 proposing development of a recoverable
reconnaissance satellite.
  The plan was intriguing but premature. The main obstacle was the
scorching passage back through the atmosphere. As Eisenhower would
say in his 1957 speech, any object that began its descent through the at-
                mosphere at speeds in excess of 16,000 mph would generate tremen-
      dous friction and burn up like a meteor. Scientists had started to tackle
the problem in the mid-1950s as rocket technology advanced and de-
      mand grew for a heat shield that would protect nuclear warheads as they
plunged toward their targets in the final phase of flight through space.
One counterintuitive solution was to design a blunt rather than stream-
       lined warhead that would compress the air ahead of it as it descended,
forming an insulating cushion to ward off the heat. Another approach
relied on thick walls of copper to soak up the heat, but the metal casing
would be prohibitively heavy. Eventually, General Electric researchers
came up with a clever idea: a heat shield that would melt away during
reentry, dissipating the heat. The process is called ablation cooling.
   Because the reentry technology was not yet perfected in early 1956,
the RAND proposal for a recoverable satellite initially dropped from
sight. Still believing that the WS-1 17L's video transmission system was
                       226        Secret      Empire


feasible, Air Force officials also questioned the time lag between taking
the pictures in space, returning the film to earth, and delivering devel-
      oped photographs to Washington. But Mert Davies, Amrom Katz, and
other RAND     researchers persisted, betting that improvements in rock-
     etry and reentry technology would make a film-return satellite not only
workable but more attractive than the video-relay WS-117L program
that they had done so much to initiate a few years earlier.
   The simplicity of design appealed to the RAND group. Just as Kelly
Johnson had used an uncomplicated concept, the glider, as the basis for
the U-2, Davies, Katz, and their colleagues in Santa Monica came to re-
      alize that designing a reconnaissance satellite around well-established
photographic principles — cameras and film — would be easier and
quicker than wrestling with the temperamental technology of transmit-
     ting video signals. Relaying images from space to earth as electronic
data was a brilliant and daring idea, but in the mid-1950s, the technol-
     ogy was out of reach. When an effective heat shield was in hand, it made
sense to take conventional photographs in space and send the film back
to earth.
   This approach was not without its own formidable technical chal-
        lenges, including development of a camera that would produce useful
pictures of Soviet military installations while orbiting more than 100
miles above the earth at better than 17,000 mph. New cameras and film
would be needed that could withstand the wrenching physical forces of
launch and the extreme temperature fluctuations of space flight. Along
with rockets that could loft a satellite into orbit, a film-return system re-
       quired precise deorbiting techniques that would bring a capsule back to
earth at a preselected location where it could be recovered. But the tim-
    ing of Davies and the other RAND scientists couldn't have been better.
With Eisenhower wary of using the U-2, and the Russians moving into
space, any shortcut to producing a working reconnaissance satellite was
bound to be enticing.
   Davies enhanced the appeal by simplifying the design for the camera
system. Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corporation had developed a
rotary panoramic camera for fighter aircraft. The camera and film ro-
      tated inside a drum, recording images each time it revolved past a slit in
                     Creating        Corona            227


the side of the drum. Davies disliked the system because it had too many
moving parts. "What a terrible design to be moving all that mass within
a drum," he said. But it got him thinking about how the design might be
modified for use in a satellite. His "hot idea," as he called it, was to at-
      tach a panoramic camera to a satellite and spin the entire assembly. The
spinning motion would help stabilize the satellite while also bringing
the camera around for a new photograph with each revolution of the
satellite. The camera lenses would point through windows in the side of
the satellite capsule and the images would be imprinted crosswise on the
film.
   With the addition of the spinning panoramic camera, RAND was
eager to pitch its proposal for a recoverable satellite to the government.
Davies and Katz proved to be tireless salesmen. Starting in late spring of
1957, they arranged briefings in Santa Monica for many of the people
who were responsible for guiding the nation's advanced technology and
space programs, including the two officers managing the WS-117L
project under Schriever, Air Force Col. Frederic C. E. "Fritz" Oder and
Navy Commander Robert Truax. Davies and Katz also explained their
plan to members of the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board and the Sci-
     ence Advisory Committee of the Office of Defense Mobilization. (This
was before Killian was named science adviser and the committee was
moved over to the White House and renamed.) As a result of the brief-
      ings, Killian and Land were well aware of the RAND proposal by mid-
1957, and it changed their thinking about the likelihood of developing
an effective spy satellite before the end of the decade.
   Although the two men well understood the potential benefits of a
photoreconnaissance satellite, and had discussed the idea in the surprise
attack report two years earlier, they had assumed that technological
problems, including the development of reliable rockets, would delay
the debut of a working system until the early 1960s, at best. As a result,
they had pushed the Eisenhower administration to move ahead with ad-
          vanced aircraft projects, starting with the U-2 and then adding a super-
      sonic spy plane once it became clear that the U-2 could be tracked by
Soviet radar. They had recognized that the WS-117L program was
technically complex and probably impractical for the time being. The
                        228        Secret      Empire


RAND    plan, by contrast, looked feasible. If adequately funded and ef-
         fectively managed, it might produce a working satellite within a year or
two. Before the summer was over, Oder convinced Schriever and his top
deputy, Brig. Gen. Osmond Ritland, formerly BisselPs deputy on the
U-2 project, that the RAND plan could produce a reconnaissance satel-
    lite long before the WS-1 17L program. They, in turn, consulted with
Dick Leghorn, who was back in the picture as a member of the Aerial
Inspection Subcommittee of the President's Arms Control and Disar-
         mament Group.

   Leghorn's involvement was fortuitous. During his years at Kodak, he
had remained engaged with policymakers in Washington about aerial
reconnaissance and disarmament issues. As the idea of a recoverable
satellite began to gain momentum, no one in the country had a better
appreciation for its potential benefits than Leghorn. A friend of Killian
and Land, a former associate of Schriever, and a longtime acquaintance
of Davies and Katz, he also understood the technological and bureau-
      cratic barriers that would have to be overcome.

  Leghorn's thinking about satellites had evolved from his work on the
Beacon Hill study and his service as an aide to Schriever in the early
1950s, a period when he thought that specialized aircraft and high-
altitude balloons offered the best hope of monitoring Soviet military
forces. By the mid-1950s, Leghorn had warmed to the idea of spy satel-
       lites. With his customary knack for looking over the horizon, he sug-
            gested that they might also make it easier to strike arms control
agreements with Moscow because satellites could help verify that the
Russians were carrying out their commitments to limit or reduce their
armaments. Leghorn knew that without the means to check Russian
compliance, arms control deals would be unenforceable and impracti-
     cal. Since there seemed little chance that the Soviet Union would per-
     mit on-site inspection of its nuclear forces, the only way to keep track of
their weapons would be from the air or from space. Satellites could, in
effect, substitute for the Open Skies plan that Nikita Khrushchev had
dismissed at Geneva.
   In October 1955, just a few months after the Geneva summit meet-
     ing, Leghorn circulated a paper to friends in the government, outlining
                     Creating       Corona             229


his ideas about using satellites to support arms control accords. In July
1956, he revised the paper and sent a copy to Schriever. Then in May
1957 he lobbied the White House directly in a memorandum that urged
a greatly expanded effort to produce a photoreconnaissance satellite.
Leghorn wanted the project to be treated as "a priority national effort."
Specifically, he said, "To collect warning and arms information for intel-
          ligence and disarmament purposes, the military invulnerability of the
satellite is a unique characteristic, compared with covert intelligence,
unauthorized aerial over-flight, and mutual ground and aerial inspec-
 tion."
   Leghorn's discussions with Oder and Schriever in 1957 coincided
with his desire to start his own business. Leghorn resigned from Kodak
in the summer of 1957. Before long, he and Duncan MacDonald, who
had worked with Leghorn during the Bikini nuclear tests and had later
run the Boston University Optical Research Laboratory, founded the
Itek Corporation. Its main asset was the Boston University lab, which
they bought from the university for the bargain price of $100,000 —
with the help of a loan from Laurence Rockefeller — after the Pentagon
decided it could no longer afford to support the lab and its one-
hundred-member staff. Leghorn and MacDonald hoped to turn the lab
into a profit-making enterprise. They soon got a big assist from the CIA
and Leghorn's friend, Richard Bissell.
   Leghorn and MacDonald closed their deal with Harold Case, the
president of the university, just before Bissell offered to buy the lab from
the school, hoping to turn it into a CIA proprietary company. Like
other proprietary firms that the Agency had established, it would appear
to be privately controlled but would actually be owned and operated by
the CIA to handle secret projects. Once Bissell learned that Leghorn
had bought the lab, he invited him to Washington. Before long,
Leghorn was assisting the CIA on several aerial reconnaissance projects,
including satellites and the development of a new supersonic spy plane.
  During the summer of 1957, Oder, Schriever, and Leghorn con-
      cluded that the best way to get the recoverable satellite built would be to
follow the project management model used for the U-2. That would re-
       quire presidential approval, separation of the program from the
                         230        Secret      Empire


WS-1 17L operation, and creation of another secret project office at the
CIA to manage the satellite work. Oder, who had worked at the CIA be-
     fore moving back to the Air Force to take over day-to-day management
of the WS-1 17L project, suggested several additional steps that would
help disguise the government effort to build a recoverable spy satellite.
Because the WS-1 17L project had attracted news coverage, Oder pro-
      posed publicly canceling the Air Force program as the CIA geared up to
handle the recoverable satellite project. In its place, the Air Force would
announce that it was initiating its own biomedical scientific satellite
project to supplement the Vanguard program. This partial fiction — or
"second story," as Oder called it— would provide a convenient cover for
the launching of the CIA's satellites from the Air Force site at Point Ar-
guello, which would later become Vandenberg Air Force Base.
   As the summer progressed, Schriever and Leghorn sold the approach
to powerful allies, including Killian, Land, and Bissell. At the end of Au-
      gust, Schriever outlined the plan to Goodpaster. Ritland and Oder dis-
         cussed itfurther with Bissell. But at this point, it was still an idea in
search of presidential approval and action.
   Their cause was indirectly helped along by the U-2 . Under intense
pressure from the CIA and Pentagon to resume spy flights over the So-
     viet interior, Eisenhower in May had reluctantly approved a series of
U-2 missions over the summer to collect intelligence about Soviet mis-
   sile and nuclear weapons programs. The seven flights, code-named Op-
            eration Soft Touch, originated at a secret CIA base in Lahore, Pakistan,
and were concentrated over the Central Asian areas of the Soviet
Union, in particular Kazakhstan. Conducted over a three-week period
in August, they produced another batch of invaluable photographs,
showing the rocket and missile launch center at Tyuratam, east of the
Aral Sea, the nuclear testing ground at Semipalatinsk, and a previously
unknown missile site in Sary Shagan, just west of Lake Balkhash.
  The photographs reinforced the need for overhead reconnaissance
operations, and reaffirmed the value of the U-2. But the flights once
again underscored the danger of sending manned aircraft into Soviet
airspace. Even though the CIA had worked on making the planes less
                      Creating       Corona             231


visible to Soviet radar after the initial missions a year earlier, the new
flights had been tracked by the Russians. Bissell and other officials vis-
      ited the White House on August 2 3 to show Eisenhower some of the
latest photographs. Apparently hoping that the remarkably detailed pic-
       tures would overcome Eisenhower's hesitation about using the plane,
Bissell sought permission to make another flight. Eisenhower turned
down the request, and most of the others that followed in the months to
come. "Operation Soft Touch proved to be the high water mark of U-2
operations against the Soviet Union," the CIA reported in its history of
the aircraft. If anything, Operation Soft Touch left Eisenhower more
eager than ever to come up with a less vulnerable way of spying on the
Soviet Union.
  The launch of the two Sputniks made the RAND                plan for a recover-
    able satellite all but irresistible. As Katz put it, "Now, by the fall of 1957,
not only were the kinds of previously operating constraints removed,
but Sputniks I and II were added. This permitted the entry of 'space
flight' and 'satellites' in the list of Okay ideas for the military. A sense of
urgency developed in the satellite business, and a corresponding sense
of increased urgency in the reconnaissance business. Hence recce [re-
             connaissance] satellites were doubly Okay."
  The turning point came during a few short weeks in October and
November 1 957. On October 24, the same day that Eisenhower offered
Killian the science adviser's post over breakfast at the White House, the
President's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities sub-
        mitted its semiannual report. The panel's job was to give the White
House independent advice about the operations and research projects
of the CIA and other intelligence agencies. Killian was the chairman of
this group and Land was a member. The board, among other things,
had been studying proposals for advanced aerial reconnaissance systems
that might replace the U-2 . One involved development of a supersonic
aircraft that, unlike the U-2, could actually travel undetected through
Soviet airspace. The other project was the WS-1 17L satellite program.
The board told Eisenhower that both projects were falling behind
schedule and relied on technologies so sophisticated that they seemed
                         232        Secret      Empire


unattainable in the near future. The short-term answer, the board sug-
         gested, might be an interim, recoverable photoreconnaissance system
like the one envisioned by RAND.
   Four days later, James Lay, the executive secretary of the National
Security Council, informed McElroy and Allen Dulles that Eisenhower
wanted a joint report from the Pentagon and the CIA on the develop-
     ment of the new spy plane and the Air Force's WS-1 17L.
  By chance, Davies and Katz published their recommendation for a
film-return satellite on November 12. The report, entitled "A Family of
Recoverable Reconnaissance Satellites," emphasized simplicity and
speed. "This memorandum describes a reconnaissance satellite system
that would provide an early and continuing photographic reconnais-
      sance capability in augmentation of the WS-1 17L program. Relatively
simple in operation, the system would use a camera of essentially con-
             ventional design in a comparatively unsophisticated orbiting vehicle. A
launching date about one year from the date of contract is contem-
       plated. The system will produce pictures of a scale and resolution that
will yield valuable intelligence information about large areas of the So-
     viet Union."
   Davies and Katz proposed a series of satellites, beginning with a 300-
pound model that would provide coverage of millions of square miles of
Soviet territory. In reconnaissance terminology, this was known as
broad-area search. The initial satellite would orbit about 150 miles
above the earth with its camera system in operation over the Soviet
Union for one day, enough time to photograph roughly half the Soviet
landmass, which stretched across 5,300 miles and eleven time zones.
  The scale and resolution of photographs would be good enough, they
said, to identify railroads, highways, and canals. "Urban centers, indus-
      trial areas, airfields, naval facilities, seaport areas, and the like can be
seen. Very likely, defense missile sites of the sort found around the
Moscow area will also be identifiable. Thus, with repeated surveillance,
it will be possible to find new major installations, perhaps to learn some-
         thing about patterns of use of Soviet ICBM systems, and certainly to ob-
      tain clues for the direction of other, higher-resolution systems that can
provide more detailed, accurate identification."




                                                                                       :
                    Creating       Corona            233


   At about this time — the exact date is uncertain — Schriever paid a visit
to Cambridge to see Jerome Wiesner, an MIT electrical engineer and
veteran of several government-sponsored research programs, including
the wartime effort to develop microwave radar. As Schriever and Wies-
    ner talked about the comparative advantages of a film-return and data-
transmission satellite, Wiesner called Land to see if they could come
over to his laboratory at Polaroid. The three men talked there for sev-
    eral hours. "By the end of the afternoon, we had a recoverable satellite,"
Wiesner later recalled.
  As Neil McElroy collected information so he could respond to the
White House request for an update on the WS-1 17L program, he re-
      ceived astatus report on November 12 from Richard E. Horner, the as-
       sistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development, which
said that an interim, film-recovery satellite could likely be developed at
least a year before the more complex video signal system.
   During this period, officials from Lockheed and Schriever's staff in
Los Angeles opened a series of discussions about how to accelerate the
WS-1 17L program. One proposal called for modifying the program to
add a recoverable satellite and to use the Thor intermediate-range mis-
    sile as a booster instead of the Atlas. Lockheed had considered the ideas
earlier but shelved them because of funding limitations. At the end of
November, Lockheed          outlined a recoverable-satellite plan to
Schriever's office and on December 5 the company presented the gen-
    eral with a preliminary proposal. Anxious to move ahead with the project
while officials in Washington were pondering whether to cloak the pro-
      gram in secrecy and turn it over to the CIA to manage, Schriever made
preparations to include a recoverable satellite system in the WS-117L
effort. It was designated as Program IIA.
   On the same day that Lockheed presented its preliminary plan,
Quarles, representing McElroy and Allen Dulles, gave the White
House a verbal report on the status of the WS-1 17L project. Though
official accounts of the joint Pentagon-CIA technical evaluation are
scarce, it apparently affirmed the view, already held by Killian and Land,
that the recoverable satellite was a more promising and practical idea
than the video system.
                         234        Secret      Empire


  The interim system that now enjoyed the support of the Pentagon,
the CIA, and Eisenhower's trusted science advisers was essentially the
system that Davies and Katz had proposed in RAND's November 12
memorandum on recoverable satellites. The satellite itself, which would
contain a Fairchild panoramic camera and Kodak film, would sit atop a
two-stage rocket consisting of a liquid-fuel Thor booster and solid-fuel
Aerobee 75 second stage. The Aerobee, built by Aerojet, had been de-
      signed as the second-stage booster for the Vanguard program.
  With momentum for the RAND proposal gathering, the main pro-
          ponents ofthe system — including Killian, Land, Bissell, Goodpaster,
Schriever, and Ritland — held secret discussions at the White House in
December 1957. After reviewing all the options, they agreed the in-
       terim plan was the best. They substituted a liquid-propellant Agena
booster built by Lockheed for the Aerobee. The Agena, which had been
built as part of the WS-1 17L project, was more powerful than the Aer-
      obee and had the added advantage of also housing the satellite itself, al-
              leviating the need for a third-stage vehicle. As Oder had recommended,
they decided to put the new project under CIA management, publicly
declare the termination of Program IIA of the WS-117L project, and
have the Air Force announce that it was establishing a research satellite
effort that would be called Discoverer.
  The planning overlapped with final preparations for the test launch
of America's first satellite in early December. Unlike the Russians, who
kept their rocket operations secret until they could report a successful
launch, the schedule for the Vanguard program was public. As a result,
the nation and world turned their attention to Cape Canaveral on Tues-
     day, December 3, the launch date. Dozens of reporters from around the
globe assembled on Florida's Atlantic coast to cover the launch. The
motels along highway Al A, including the Sea Missile, the Starlite, and
the Vanguard, were filled with people who had traveled to the area to
witness the rocket firing.
  The flight was postponed because of technical problems, not an un-
         common occurrence with missiles and rockets, as the nation came to
learn as the space age unfolded. But at the time, the country had no ex-
          perience with rocket launches and knew only that the Russians had al-
                     Creating       Corona             235


ready fired two satellites into orbit. The unexpected delay was a monu-
        mental embarrassment. John Foster Dulles, concerned about the im-
     pact on America's standing abroad, vented his irritation the next day
at a National Security Council meeting at the White House, angrily
calling the delay "a disaster for the United States" that "had made us the
laughing-stock of the whole Free World."
  A new launch date was quickly set for Friday morning, December 6.
At 10:45, an hour before the rocket was set to lift off, the Pentagon
opened a telephone circuit directly to Eisenhower's farm in Gettysburg,
where the president was still recuperating from a mild stroke he had suf-
      fered on November 25. Another line was cleared to Washington so Dr.
John P. Hagen, the manager of Project Vanguard, could listen to the
final countdown. Seconds before ignition of the first-stage rocket, the
red-and-white gantry crane pulled away from the rocket and a cloud of
vaporizing liquid oxygen formed as expected at the junction of the first
and second stages.
   Everything seemed normal as the engine rumbled to life and the
rocket started to rise slowly from the ground. But it was no more than 4
feet off the pad when the first stage exploded in flames and dark smoke
and crumpled to the ground in a heap of burning debris.
   The spectacular failure capped a miserable autumn in Washington.
The next day's headline in the New York Times — coincidentally the six-
      teenth anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor — announced the fail-
     ure and its consequences succinctly: "Vanguard Rocket Burns on Beach;
Failure To Launch Test Satellite Assailed as Blow to U.S. Prestige." The
British press had a field day. "Oh, What A Flopnik!" said the Daily Her-
    ald in London. The Daily Express headline was "U.S. Calls It Kaputnik,"
and the Daily Mirror declared, "Oh Dear!!! U.S. Sputnik Blows Up On
The Ground! !!" The coverage was so withering that Soviet newspapers,
accustomed to producing their own, distorted accounts about news in
the United States, in this case simply reprinted news stories and editori-
    als from American newspapers.
  Killian, in one of his first actions as presidential science adviser, ap-
         pointed three top scientists to review the Vanguard program. They rec-
                  ommended that the Pentagon rely instead on Wernher von Braun and
                       236        Secret     Empire


the Army's Jupiter-C rocket to get a satellite into orbit during the Inter-
          national Geophysical Year that was due to expire at the end of 1958.
   It was sound advice. The next Vanguard launch, scheduled for late
January 1958, was scrubbed because of severe mechanical problems —
the entire second-stage engine had to be replaced. With that setback,
the Pentagon instructed the Army to launch the Jupiter C as soon as
possible. The preliminary countdown began almost immediately at
Cape Canaveral. At 10:48 p.m. on Friday, January 31, the Jupiter-C
rocket, illuminated by powerful floodlights, rose from its launch pad on
a plume of fiery exhaust and roared toward space with its precious cargo,
a 30-pound, bullet-shaped satellite named Explorer that contained two
miniature radio transmitters and a small Geiger counter to measure the
intensity of cosmic radiation. It was a midget compared to Sputnik II,
but it was enough to recover some of America's lost prestige.
   Eisenhower had flown down to Augusta that afternoon for a week of
golf and relaxation. In a sign of the anxiety that by this time surrounded
the American space effort, his press secretary, Jim Hagerty, had spent
the evening relaying the latest information about launch preparations to
the president from Goodpaster, who had remained behind at the White
House. Goodpaster, in turn, kept a line open to Army officials. When
Hagerty received confirmation that the satellite was in orbit, he phoned
the president at 1 2 :44 a.m.
   "Mr. President, it's in orbit," he said. "General Goodpaster has just
received the official word."
   "That's wonderful, that's wonderful," a jubilant Eisenhower replied.
"I sure feel a lot better now."
   So did the nation. In Hunstville, Alabama, home to von Braun and
the Army rocket program, thousands of residents poured into the
streets minutes after the rocket launching. "It was like New Year's Eve,"
the Times reported. "Fire engines and police cars raced through the
streets, their sirens shrieking. Motorists all over the city sounded their
horns." Congress celebrated the feat with an outpouring of lofty rheto-
    ric and praise for the Army. Lyndon Johnson declared, "Now that we
have started, let us press on with all the force, imagination and boldness
of which America is capable."
                     Creating       Corona            237


  But even as the nation and the Eisenhower administration toasted
Explorer, the White House and Pentagon knew one successful launch
of a tiny American scientific satellite did not close the outerspace gap
with the Russians. On Thursday, February 6, as the celebrations were
subsiding, Killian and Land met with McElroy, Dulles, and Quarles to
go over the plans for the Air Force's interim spy satellite, which was to
be presented to Eisenhower the next day. The Pentagon officials con-
       firmed that they would separate the film-recovery system from the Air
Force's other satellite work and turn it over to the CIA, a rare turf con-
        cession inWashington. Bissell would run the new program, following
the streamlined management model he had employed with the U-2.
The Air Force would provide technical assistance, including the rocket
boosters, and make its launch site at Point Arguello available. Lock-
      heed, which would build the second-stage rocket that would also house
the camera system and film-recovery capsule, would once again serve as
the main contractor, though this time the company's Missile Systems
Division in Northern California would be the lead organization rather
than the Skunk Works.
  The next morning, Killian and Land slipped into the Oval Office
with Goodpaster for a meeting with the president. The Pentagon's se-
      cret 1988 history of the satellite project described the discussion, draw-
    ing on notes taken during the meeting by Goodpaster.
   "They explained to the president that the satellite would orbit the
earth three times, taking pictures as it passed over the Sino-Soviet bloc,
and then would deorbit the film capsule. Killian told Eisenhower that
the satellite would emit no electronic signals and, therefore, could be
completely covert. At Killian's request, Land explained that this spe-
     cific, small project was for bona fide intelligence purposes. It would be
of utmost importance to conduct it quietly, under the cloak of other ac-
         tivities. Comparing the satellite optics to those in the U-2, Land told
the president that whereas the U-2 could photograph objects as small as
4 feet, the satellite cameras would only be able to discern objects 50 to
100 feet on a side. This being the case, it would be very easy for the So-
      viets, ifthey learned about the project, to build dummies that could
'fool' the satellite cameras; therefore, it was of paramount importance to
                        238        Secret      Empire


keep them from learning of it. The satellite pictures, Land said, could be
used as a 'scouting' program to guide more precise intelligence means to
selected targets."
   Eisenhower approved the proposal and told Killian and Land that he
wanted the CIA to handle the intelligence aspects of the project. He said
that only a handful of people should know about the plan.
  Killian and Land left the meeting with the impression that the presi-
      dent, while determined to put the CIA in charge of the spy work, ex-
           pected the Air Force to direct the project. Goodpaster thought
Eisenhower wanted the CIA to run the effort. He returned to the Oval
Office later in the day seeking clarification. Eisenhower told him em-
           phatically that the project was to be managed by the CIA, working with
the Air Force and the Advanced Research Projects Agency, a new Penta-
     gon organization that Killian had proposed creating to encourage and
oversee advanced technology research for the military. Eisenhower "be-
       lieved the project should be centered in the new Defense 'space' agency,
doing what the CIA wanted them to do," Goodpaster noted in a memo-
               randum. He informed Killian.

   A day or two later Land appeared unexpectedly at Bissell's office at
the CIA and informed him that, in addition to directing the U-2 pro-
        gram, Bissell would now be running a secret reconnaissance satellite
project. Bissell knew as little about space flight as he had known about
aviation when he was assigned to build the U-2 . Once again, he would
have to rely on outside experts.
   Bissell quickly brought Ozzie Ritland back to the agency from the Air
Force, where he was serving as Schriever's vice commander. Ritland had
worked smoothly with Bissell as his deputy on the U-2 project. He
wanted Ritland, now a brigadier general, at his side again to handle liai-
     son with the Air Force, which would be responsible for launching the
spy satellites, controlling their operation in outer space, and recovering
the film capsules as they neared the end of their descent back to earth.
George Kucera, a member of Bissell's staff, came up with the code name
for the project, inspired by one of his favorite cigars: Corona.
   The first order of business was to preserve the secrecy of the project.
The plan was to pretend that the WS-1 17L photoreconnaissance satel-
                    Creating       Corona           239


lite project, Program IIA, was being terminated and that a new Air
Force scientific satellite project, called Discoverer, was being inaugu-
      rated. This was roughly the prestidigitation that Col. Fritz Oder, the
manager of WS-1 17L, had suggested to shield work on an interim, re-
          coverable satellite system. Reporters were well aware of the entire
WS-117L program, including the recently added recoverable satellite
project. If that element of WS-1 17L was shut down, the theory went,
news organizations — and the Russians — would believe Washington had
given up on its effort to build a recoverable photoreconnaissance satel-
     lite. Meanwhile, the Discoverer program, which ostensibly involved
biomedical experiments in space, would provide an innocuous explana-
      tion for the construction of a new Air Force rocket pad near Point Ar-
guello, the satellite launches from there, and the recovery of return
capsules in the skies off Hawaii.
   On the last day of February, the Advanced Research Projects Agency
officially ordered the cancellation of the interim photoreconnaissance
system. The rest of the WS-1 17L program was left intact, including the
video-readout satellite project, known as Samos, and the development
of a satellite with infrared detectors that could provide early warning of
Soviet missile launches by spotting the fiery exhaust plume of rockets as
they lifted off. This was known as the Sentry project. The sudden, unex-
        pected action puzzled contractors and government officials who were
not cleared to know that the recoverable satellite project was actually
being transferred to the CIA.
   Mert Davies and Amrom Katz, among those who were not cleared,
were dumbfounded and infuriated by the cancellation of the WS-1 17L
recoverable satellite. Bud Wienberg, who had worked with Schriever
and Leghorn in the Air Force in the early 1950s and was involved in
managing the WS-1 1 7L project, was with Davies and Katz when Lock-
      heed announced the demise of the program. He described their reaction
to Cargill Hall, the Air Force historian.
   "They went ballistic, Amrom particularly. Amrom took it upon him-
     self to try to get the effort reinstated and he began going around the
country briefing anyone who would listen about the unwise decision to
cancel the recoverable satellite system. I mean he had a cause! He be-
                       240       Secret     Empire


came so well known as an agitator on this that he disqualified himself for
being cleared for what was now a black program — even though he had
conceived it! The folks in charge knew that if they cleared Amrom, he
would immediately cease agitating and that would tip everyone else that
the program was under way."
   Davies soon realized that some kind of clandestine program was in
progress. "Dick Leghorn and a lot of other people I knew stopped talk-
    ing to me about satellites," he later said. "I knew something was going

   Davies eventually concluded that the CIA and Air Force feared that
   on."
Katz, who was very talkative, might inadvertently disclose the secret and
therefore decided to keep the two RAND specialists in the dark. It
wasn't until 1962 that Davies was cleared by the government to be
briefed about Corona. By then, the spy satellite system had been in op-
         eration for two years. A gentle and gracious man, Davies, in the last
years of his life, made light of the rebuff, but it clearly wounded him. No
one had done more to champion the concept of a spy satellite. For more
than a decade he had coaxed the daring idea toward reality, moving it
inch by inch from the first primitive proposals put together by RAND
to the film-return system that Eisenhower ordered up on February 6,
1958.
   Thirty years later Davies shifted uncomfortably in his chair in his
spare office at RAND when asked if he thought of himself as one of the
founding fathers of a technology that had helped to stabilize the cold
war. He was eighty-one years old and no longer actively involved in
RAND work, but he still came to the organization's offices in Santa
Monica most days, energized by the same passion for space research
that had brought him to RAND five decades earlier.
  "I think so," he said hesitantly, "but you know, as Amrom used to say,
there's enough credit to go around."
                       CHAPTER             TWELVE




  "Go Off and Build That Thing"

James W. Plummer,            a young electrical engineer at Lockheed
    Missile and Space Division in Palo Alto, was summoned to his boss's
office in late February 1958 and handed one of the nation's most sensi-
     tive intelligence projects.
  "Jim, are you willing to take on a new job?" Jack Carter, his supervi-
    sor, asked.
   Plummer, a lanky, dark-haired engineer who was managing develop-
      ment of the satellite vehicle for the WS-1 17L program, liked the job he
had. After joining Lockheed in 1955 and working for a spell in the
company's research lab, he had met Bob Salter, one of the RAND veter-
    ans who had moved to Lockheed when development work began on the
reconnaissance satellite they had designed. Impressed by Salter's enthu-
      siasm for satellites, Plummer transferred to the WS-1 17L project.
   He found the idea of satellites captivating. "When I read the [WS-
1 17L] proposal, I thought, Wow! is this really possible? You know, all of
a sudden you're going to take this thing and shoot it up into space and
make it stay there and then you're going to stabilize it like an airplane
and then you're going to control it from the ground, and it's going to go
around the globe. The first time you read it, it's pretty shocking."
   Now he was being invited to consider another, unspecified project. "I
thought, man, I must have goofed up on something."
   "We want you to go underground," Carter said. "We want you to
head up a totally covert program. We want you to disappear from Lock-
     heed and all your friends, and not tell anyone where you're going."
  Carter handed Plummer a batch of rough schematic drawings that

                                     241
                          242         Secret       Empire


Mert Davies and Amrom Katz had prepared while brainstorming about
a recoverable satellite.

   "Go off and build that thing," Carter instructed Plummer.
   lb Lockheed executives, Plummer seemed a natural choice, since he
was already working on another satellite project. The WS-117L, like
Corona, was designed to work in tandem with the company's second-
stage rocket booster, called the Agena. Since Plummer was also familiar
with the rocket and the technical problems of modifying it to support a
large package of reconnaissance equipment in orbit after it had ex-
        hausted itsfuel, he seemed ideally suited to deal with the new satellite.
   Plummer wasn't so sure. When the brief meeting ended, he was
dazed. "I had no place or people to work with," he said. To give himself
time to collect his thoughts, he rented a motel room in Palo Alto, where
he retired with the drawings.
   It soon started to rain heavily. Plummer was so absorbed by the draw-
      ings that he didn't realize a small lake was forming around the motel. "I
opened the door and a flood of water came rushing into my room," he
recalled. Water was already up to the door of his car. Fearing that the
drawings would be ruined, he rolled them up, picked up his other be-
            longings, and drove to his home in Los Altos. He informed his wife he
would be extremely busy in the months ahead. He was not permitted to
tell her any more than that.
    Over the next few days, Plummer recruited a few engineers he knew
he could trust, and arranged to rent a vacant building along the
Bayshore Freeway, the main highway between San Jose and San Fran-
      cisco. The building was owned by Hiller Helicopters. Stan Hiller, who
ran the company, had planned to use the building for research and de-
                 velopment projects, including a small flying disc that could ferry indi-
        viduals from place to place. When that overly ambitious project failed,
Hiller had no further use for the building.
   "It was perfect," Plummer recalled. "There was place for a metal
working shop, an electrical shop, and the other things we would need."
  The work awaiting him was formidable and the deadline improbable.
   The Thor rocket, an intermediate-range missile, had been success-
     fully tested and was already in full-scale production by the Douglas Air-
         "Go Off and Build            That    Thing"           243

craft Company. It was just about the only element of the Corona system
that looked reasonably reliable at the outset. The Agena had not yet
flown. In theory, the combination of the Thor and Agena would provide
sufficient launch velocity to loft a camera system into orbit, but the pro-
          jections had not yet been tested with an actual flight. The proposed
camera system looked plausible, but no one knew for sure whether it
could be wedded to the Agena and whether it would work in space. New
technologies were required to control the Agena while in orbit and keep
it stable enough for picture taking. Getting the film back to earth was
another challenge. The film-return capsule that was part of the satellite
would have to be detached in orbit and perfectly positioned so that it
would drop into a small recovery area near Hawaii. Even if a heat shield
kept the film from baking during reentry, the return capsule would have
to be plucked from the air as it neared sea level, no easy feat.
   The urgent need for the photographs, combined with the growing
political pressure on the White House to overtake the Russian lead in
space, produced backbreaking deadlines for the project. Design plans
were to be completed in two months; a prototype satellite had to be
ready two months later. Components for the first flight were supposed
to be on hand within ten months and the first launch was scheduled for
eleven months from the starting date.
   It was not a schedule for a timid manager. The message from
Plummer's bosses at Lockheed and in Washington was emphatic: "Go
as fast and as hard as you can, take chances."
   Plummer, who had studied Kelly Johnson's management techniques,
decided he needed to create his own Northern California version of the
Skunk Works. The staff would be small but highly skilled and motivated
and comfortable with improvising solutions to difficult technical prob-
      lems. Paperwork would be kept to a minimum. He would deal directly
with Bissell and his top aides. "Kelly's operation was my model," Plum-
     mer said.

  The approach meshed well with Bissell's habits. Like Johnson, Plum-
    mer found Bissell refreshingly unbureaucratic. "He trusted the contrac-
    tor to do the right thing," Plummer recalled. When problems
developed — and there were many as Lockheed tried to get the satellite
                      244        Secret     Empire


off the ground — Bissell would ask for a technical briefing, then tell
Plummer to move ahead. "There wasn't any second-guessing, there was
no hiring of outside experts," Plummer said.
   Though Plummer could not match Johnson's creative design talents,
he was no slouch on technical issues and proved to be a deft executive.
Later in his career he became general manager of the Lockheed Missiles
and Space Company, then served as director of the National Reconnais-
      sance Office and chairman of the Aerospace Corporation, a federally
funded research and development corporation that oversees the Air
Force's contracts with private aerospace companies.
   Plummer was born in Idaho Springs, Colorado, in 1920. His father
was trained as a machinist but worked as a miner. His mother, Mary,
came from a family that had moved from one place to another around
the world for Standard Oil. As Jim and his older brother, Roy, were
growing up, Mary ran a grocery story and a service station. But during
the Depression the family had to give up their home and move into a
tent. Jim and Roy delivered newspapers to save enough money to go to
college.
  The boys looked to their uncle, Archibald, for career guidance. He
was a civil engineer, and was, as Jim said, "always the model of what we
wanted to do."
   "We didn't want to go to the oil fields and we didn't want to go to the
mines. Uncle Archibald had done all these glamorous things. He was in-
        volved in the Canadian oil pipeline and the trans-Alaska highway. He
built bridges and dams."
   Jim figured he, too, would become a civil engineer. But Uncle
Archibald told the boys electrical engineering was more promising. "He
told us it was going to be the coming thing," Plummer recalled.
   With $1,500 that he had accumulated, Plummer followed Roy's ex-
       ample and enrolled at San Diego State and then transferred to the Uni-
          versity of California at Berkeley, where he majored in electrical
engineering. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Plummer was eager to
volunteer for the armed forces, but waited long enough to pick up his
bachelor's degree from Berkeley. Like his brother, he enlisted in the
Navy, which dispatched the Plummer boys to Harvard to continue their
           "Go Off and Build               That      Thing"             245


engineering studies. The brothers both wound up working on the gov-
         ernment radar development project at MIT.
   The engineering and electronic work made Plummer an ideal candi-
      date to manage radar systems on Navy vessels, and he was soon on his
way to the Pacific theater, where he participated in a number of the epic
battles with Japanese forces. He also outfitted combat aircraft with the
latest electronic gear, and accompanied pilots on bombing runs. He re-
         mained inthe Navy after the war, working on a variety of technical as-
                   signments, then retired from the service in 1955 to work at Lockheed.
He would have taken a research post at Bell Labs, which recruited him,
but was so unsettled by the commotion and crowds in New York when
he visited the city for a job interview that he decided he would prefer to
work and live on the West Coast.

   After a brief stint at Lockheed's research department, Plummer was
made program director for the WS-1 17L project. It was a natural pro-
          gression from there to the Corona program, which grew directly out of
the Air Force satellite project. As he assembled a team of engineers in
Palo Alto, Plummer emphasized the need for extreme secrecy. The
whole effort would be undermined if the Russians learned about the
satellite and took measures to disguise their military forces or filled their
airfields with cardboard bombers that would appear to be real planes on
the satellite photos. The workers at Hiller Helicopter were told that the
company's former research center was now off-limits to them. Plummer
followed the advice of security officials to take a circuitous route to work
so that he could not be easily tracked.
   "Only a select few were briefed on Corona," Plummer said, "and that
made it a little bit difficult for us because we had to get things done
without telling anyone what we were doing, and sometimes without
authority. Sometimes we'd even have to go to a really smart physicist
or dynamicist and say, 'Do this for me, but we won't tell you why we
want it."
  "It was a truly covert program. There were many, many steps taken
by the C.I.A. and the Air Force which allowed us to stay totally sub-
        merged— such as having a separate accounting system. Our monies
were all hidden in the system. And of course, the word 'Corona,' or even
                         246         Secret       Empire


the letter 'C,' which scared us all to death, was never used either. We
were very, very conscious of that in everything we did. You would not
talk to someone unless you really knew that person was part of it."
   The plans called for the Agena, once in orbit, to coast through space
like an airplane in flight, sustaining the same position, or attitude, as it
circled the Earth. Keeping the Agena in the same position would re-
      quire a sophisticated attitude-control system, using cold-gas jets, gyro-
              scopes, and infrared horizon scanners to manage the pitch, roll, and yaw
of the satellite. Even the slightest malfunction might send the Agena
tumbling end-over-end through space, erasing any chance to take pho-
               tographs. No one had ever built such an exquisitely controlled space-
      craft. The stable design would also require an environmental control
system within the satellite to avoid overheating or freezing that could
damage the film.
   Dick Leghorn and Itek told Bissell that they had a very promising
camera design that would work well with the Agena. It was a panoramic
camera, based on a novel design developed earlier by the Boston Uni-
       versity optics lab for use on high-altitude balloon flights across the So-
      viet Union. "We thought we could probably get 20-25-foot ground
resolution from satellite altitudes," said Walter Levison, who had
worked with Leghorn back in the mid- 1 940s on the atomic tests in the
Pacific and later helped to develop satellite cameras at Itek. The camera
proposed by Levison and Leghorn would produce far more detailed im-
     ages than a rival camera system produced by Fairchild.
   On March 18, Bissell, Killian, and Land convened a meeting of
Corona officials and contractors at the Old Executive Office Building in
Washington, next door to the White House. The morning papers were
filled with headlines about the orbiting of a Vanguard satellite, the first
successful launch by the troubled Navy program. The tiny 6.4-inch
sphere, fired into space from Cape Canaveral, was the nation's second
satellite.
   The Corona meeting began with presentations by Itek and Fairchild,
as well as General Electric, which would build the return capsule, and
Eastman Kodak, which would provide the film. Bissell and Land de-
      cided to add the Itek proposal as an alternative camera option, leaving
          "Go Off and Build             That     Thing"           247

the final choice for a future day. The decision was an important victory
for Itek, which was trying to overtake Fairchild's commanding lead in
the camera competition.
   A week later, Bissell and General Ritland, the deputy director of the
project, summoned the key contractors to two days of meetings at the
Flamingo Motel in San Mateo, California, not far from the San Fran-
     cisco airport. Bissell informed everyone that Itek was being brought
into the project as a second camera supplier. Lockheed executives intro-
        duced Plummer as the company's project manager for the satellite. Bis-
     sell said General Electric would create a capsule that would be
incorporated into the Agena to bring the film safely back to earth.
Cooke Air Force Base at Point Arguello, which had recently been
rechristened Vandenberg Air Force Base, would be the launch site. The
atmosphere at the meeting was so optimistic that the participants settled
on a fast-track schedule that quickly turned out to be unrealistic. The
time line called for fabrication of the many components of the project to
be completed by July 1 , when a countdown would begin aimed at
launching the first satellite in November. The deadline was soon pushed
back to January 1959.
   As the meetings at the Flamingo Motel wound down, Bissell still had
no idea what the project would cost and therefore had no budget to pay
for it. Or as he bluntly put it to the government and industry represen-
           tatives, hewas "faced with the problem at present of being broke." Be-
      cause the project was still so amorphous, none of the senior figures who
had approved it, including Eisenhower, Allen Dulles, Land, and Killian,
knew how much it might cost. Bissell told the corporate representatives
that he needed estimates from them as soon as possible. The numbers
added up to roughly $7 million for just the reconnaissance gear, includ-
    ing cameras, film, and reentry capsules. As with the U-2 program, the
money would come from the CIA director's loosely monitored discre-
        tionary account, known as the Reserve for Contingencies. The much
steeper cost of the Thor and Agena rockets, construction of a launch
site, tracking stations and recovery operations would, in theory, be cov-
      ered by the Pentagon. It's hard to imagine a similar project getting
started today with such a casual approach to budgeting.
                          248         Secret       Empire


   Before returning to the East Coast, Bissell convened another meeting
in San Mateo on March 26, this one at the Villa Hotel with his top aides
and senior industry executives. He wanted to review the discussions
of the previous two days at the Flamingo. The improvisational nature of
the whole project was captured by the CIA security officer who attended
the session. "This meeting was held in the Pacifica A Conference
Room," he noted in a re a ort, "and although the general security of the
room was far from desirable, by remaining constantly on the alert and
cautioning everyone in attendance to speak in a rather low voice, it is felt
that the meeting was accomplished without any security compromise."
In other words, maintaining the secrecy of America's most technologi-
      cally advanced spy project depended on whether a group of men in an
unguarded hotel room south of San Francisco could keep their conver-
      sation to a whisper.
   Once back in Washington, Bissell started preparing a formal plan to
submit to Eisenhower. His initial draft, completed on April 9, kept both
camera options alive. Two days later, he dropped the Fairchild system,
apparently acting on the advice of Land, who was impressed with the
Itek design. "Land said the Fairchild camera was no good, it wouldn't
have done the job," Plummer said. The best Fairchild could promise
was 60- to 100-foot resolution, meaning any object smaller than 60 feet
across would be difficult if not impossible to identify. Itek said it could
reduce the resolution to 1 5 feet with its panoramic camera and slower
film. That was well within the range to show Soviet combat aircraft and
missile launch pads. To ease the blow to Fairchild, it was decided that
Itek would design the camera but Fairchild would build it.
   Bissell later described his reasoning in rejecting the Fairchild ap-
                proach: "The alternative to this system was to stabilize the capsule with
jets and to use a camera that would move within the capsule, taking pic-
       tures in a way very similar to the procedure used with the cameras in the
U-2 and other reconnaissance aircraft. Eventually, we decided that the
latter was the way to go, and we replaced Fairchild's spin-stabilized sys-
      tem with a much more convenient camera from Itek."
   Bissell was now ready to go to the White House with a more detailed
proposal than the sketchy plan that Killian and Land had presented to
         "Go Off and Build            That     Thing"           249


Eisenhower back in early February. On April 16, Bissell submitted a six-
page project and budget outline to General Goodpaster. Eisenhower
approved the plan verbally; no written authorization was made to help
maintain the strict secrecy. General Cabell may have noted the decision
on the back of an envelope, but the record on that point is unclear.
Goodpaster confirmed the decision in a memorandum for the record.
   The proposal that Eisenhower endorsed had been approved by the
director of the Advanced Research Project Agency, the assistant secre-
     tary of the Air Force for research and development, the vice commander
of the Air Force Ballistic Missile Division, and Jim Killian. BisselPs out-
    line opened with a thumbnail description of the enterprise. "Project co-
      rona contemplates the covert development and subsequent operational
use of a short-lived reconnaissance satellite from which, at the comple-
    tion of its mission, a recoverable capsule containing exposed film is sep-
      arated for return and pick up in a preselected ocean area."
  The satellite, Bissell said, was expected to produce photographs de-
       tailed enough to reveal "such major reconnaissance targets as missile
sites under construction, previously unobserved communities or other
major installations" in regions like the Soviet far north that had been in-
           accessible toAmerican reconnaissance. Bissell advised the president
that the program would involve twelve launchings, with the first satel-
    lite to be in operation no later than June 1959 and the last to be fired
into orbit in the spring of 1960. By then, it was expected, mistakenly as
it turned out, that the WS-117L electronic video transmission system
would be available for use and Corona would be phased out. (In fact, the
Corona program continued until 1972.) Bissell noted in the memo that
a spin-stabilized version of the Corona satellite, which would not re-
       quire development of a sophisticated attitude control system, could be
built and launched six months sooner than the system he was proposing.
The picture quality, however, would be significantly inferior.
   Under the Bissell plan, the project would be jointly run by three
agencies — the Pentagon's new Advanced Research Projects Agency, the
Air Force Ballistic Missile Division, and the CIA. The research agency
would be responsible for overall technical supervision of the satellite ve-
      hicle. The Air Force would direct that work, test the satellite and
                       250        Secret      Empire


booster rockets, as well as handle the launching, tracking, and recovery,
with help from the Navy in the recovery operations. The CIA, for its
part, would deal with development of the reconnaissance equipment
and supervise security. The Air Force, Bissell said, would pay for the
twelve Thor boosters and Agena vehicles, which would be diverted to
the project from the WS-117L program. The CIA would contribute
$7 million to pay for the cameras and reentry capsules.
  Following Eisenhower's approval of the plan, Dulles on April 2 5 in-
        structed the comptroller of the CIA to make $7 million available to the
Corona project, which he described as "an unprogrammed requirement
for which other funds are not currently available." On the same day, Bis-
     sell gave Lockheed a succinct three-page "Work Statement" outlining
the company's responsibilities.
   The kinks inherent in Bissell's hydra-headed organizational plan
quickly became apparent, but he managed to keep the problems from
escalating out of control by working closely with his Air Force deputy,
General Ritland, and using his influence and ties to Land and Killian to
head off disabling battles. The overlapping responsibilities and inter-
     ests, however, proved to be a fateful error that set the stage for titanic
battles between the Pentagon and the CIA over the control of spy satel-
      lites inthe early 1960s.
   The fault was not Bissell's. He was merely reaffirming the organiza-
      tional structure that Eisenhower had requested back in February. Well
aware that Washington turf wars could cripple an innovative technology
project, and instinctively wary of the parochial attitude of the military
services, Eisenhower had placed overall management of the project in
the CIA's hands, hoping to replicate the speed and efficiency of the U-2
program. But he realized the Pentagon would have to play a significant
role in the Corona program by providing manpower for the project, the
rockets, and the launch site, as well as handling the tracking of the satel-
    lite during flight and recovery of the film capsule. In initially authoriz-
     ing the project earlier in the year, Eisenhower had decreed that the
Pentagon should be involved through the Advanced Research Projects
Agency and the Air Force. The integrated plan seemed sensible, since
the Air Force already had on hand the rockets that could carry a satellite
          "Go Off and Build             That     Thing"             251

into space and the new research agency, championed by Killian, was
supposed to be agile and forward-looking. Unfortunately, over the long
run, the partnership collapsed in the face of just the kind of powerful in-
            stitutional rivalries Eisenhower feared.
   Some of the later conflicts were foreshadowed in the first months of
the project. The budget put together by Bissell in April dissolved almost
immediately when the Air Force, under pressure to accelerate its missile
programs, decided that the cost of the Thor and Agena rockets would
have to be borne by the Corona project rather than being covered by Air
Force funds. Bissell also realized that seven additional launch boosters
would be needed, four during testing and three to carry biomedical ex-
             periments into orbit to support the cover story. These and other deci-
      sions exploded BisselFs budget projections and led to a series of
high-level discussions over the summer involving Killian, Bissell, Gen-
     eral Goodpaster, Maurice Stans, the director of the Bureau of the Bud-
     get, and Donald Quarles, who had by then become deputy secretary of
defense.
  The budget tangle got worse as the Advanced Research Projects
Agency and the Air Force juggled plans for providing the rockets. By
October, Bissell concluded that the Air Force was trying to charge the
Corona program for costs associated with unrelated work on the
WS-117L project. Complaining about "rubbery accounting systems"
and "juggling costs," he told an Air Force aide that "all of us have some
embarrassing explaining to do." At one point Bissell warned General
Ridand that the soaring costs might force cancellation of the program.
In late November, he told another Air Force general that the involve-
      ment of so many agencies in decision-making produced "considerable
confusion."
  A few days later, Bissell noted his irritation in an unusually scalding
memorandum that he ordered placed in the Agency's files. "For the
record," he said, "the undersigned will never again assume any respon-
        sibility for the success of a major program without having a reasonable
degree of control over its funding either through reliance on Agency
funds or by means of an ironclad agreement with the Department of
Defense."
                        252        Secret      Empire


   One of the most threatening maneuvers was a decision by the Ad-
         vanced Research Projects Agency to slash the number of Corona
launches by a third so that money could be diverted to another satellite
project. In early December, Allen Dulles strenuously objected to the
plan in a note to Killian and Donald Quarles. He asked the two men to
meet with him to discuss the decision before the Corona cutbacks were
formally approved. The plan was dropped.
  When Eisenhower assented to the Corona project, Bissell had se-
         lected the Matomic Building on H Street, site of the U-2 operations
center, to house the command center for the satellite program. The Bal-
      listic Missile Division, based in Los Angeles, was designated to handle
day-to-day dealings with Lockheed and the other contractors. General
Ritland, vice commander and later commander of the division, super-
      vised these relations, but placed a liaison officer, Col. Clarence L. "Lee"
Battle, in Palo Alto to manage the details and to work directly with
Plummer.
   Battle was an extraordinarily well-organized, famously cantankerous
figure, who understood the importance of a streamlined management
system. The central principles, which reflected BisselPs own preference
for nimble, no-nonsense operations, came to be widely known in the
government and aerospace world as "Battle's Laws." Among them were
these management tenets: "Keep the program office small and quick-
reacting at all cost"; "Exercise extreme care in selecting people, then
rely heavily on their personal abilities"; "Cut out all unnecessary paper-
           work"; "Hit all flight and checkout failures hard. A fault uncorrected
now will come back to haunt you"; "Don't overcommunicate with
higher headquarters"; "Don't look back. History never repeats itself."
   Bissell and General Ritland, who was stationed in Southern Califor-
      nia, quickly established the same easy relationship they had enjoyed
during their collaboration on the U-2, though their friendship did not
prevent the bureaucratic and budget strains that buffeted the operation.
In recalling his collaboration with Ritland some years later, Bissell
glossed over those problems. "The program was started in a mar-
velously informal manner," Bissell said. "Ritland and I worked out the
division of labor between the two organizations as we went along. Deci-
          "Go Off and Build            That    Thing"            253

sions were made jointly. There were so few people involved and their
relations were so close that decisions could be and were made quickly
and cleanly We did not have the problem of having to make compro-
       mises or of endless delays awaiting agreement."
   The covert nature of the program produced a variety of bureaucratic
snafus, as officials who were unaware of the Corona project unwittingly
worked at cross purposes with Bissell and his staff. In July, for instance,
Pentagon officials recommended that Jupiter rockets be used as satellite
boosters so that all Thor missiles could be put in the field as offensive
weapons. The Corona team realized the shift would force them to
reengineer the entire project to fit the Jupiter, which was incompatible
with the Agena. The resulting delay would be at least nine months. Bis-
    sell quietly intervened and the recommendation was withdrawn.
   In another case, engineers who believed the cover story that biomed-
     ical experiments would be the primary purpose of the satellite launches
complained that flying the Agena in a horizontal position in orbit was
not well suited to handling mice and other animals that would be sent
aloft. They preferred that the Agena orbit in a vertical position. They
were also puzzled to learn that the interior of the Agena would not be
sufficiently air-conditioned to help sustain life. Bissell and Plummer
could not tell them that an air-conditioning system might permit light
into the chamber, which would ruin the film.
   For Bissell, the Corona project was yet another large and demanding
enterprise for his relatively small staff, which was already responsible for
the operations of three Air Force-directed U-2 detachments based in
Germany, Turkey, and Japan and for the development of a new ultra-
high-performance reconnaissance aircraft. As Corona got under way,
Bissell was still special assistant to the director of central intelligence for
planning and development, but in January 1959, Allen Dulles named
him deputy director for plans. The title sounded innocuous, but the job
was not. It put Bissell, with his moral relativism and risk-taking tenden-
     cies, incharge of the CIA's worldwide spy operations, including an array
of questionable covert activities.
    But as Bissell got the Corona project up and running in early 1958, he
still had sufficient time to give the effort the same jolt of energy that he
                        254        Secret      Empire


had brought to the U-2 program. Once again animated by the sense that
he was working on the front lines of the cold war, directing the govern-
        ment's most audacious spy project, he pushed his aides and industry ex-
           ecutives to maintain a punishing schedule. At least once a month, more
often when the program was flagging, he and General Ritland assem-
     bled two or three representatives from each of the major private con-
             tractors to get progress reports and identify problems. Bissell and
Ritland would sit side by side at one end of the table, with the business-
      men and engineers arrayed around them. Most of the meetings took
place in California. Communications between meetings took place over
secure telephone and cable lines that were managed by the CIA.
   Every organization involved recognized that its piece of the project
presented perplexing technical problems. In many cases, they were in-
        venting new science as they went along. Or as the CIA later put it, "In
the beginning, no one was exactly sure how the task of reconnaissance
from a satellite was to be accomplished. Since this was one of the pio-
    neer efforts there were no 'experts' in the field."
  General Schriever said that producing highly detailed photographs
from space was "like trying to photograph the belfry in Boston's North
Church from the Empire State Building."
   Bud Wheelon, a young physicist at the time who was working on mis-
    sile programs and later played a critical role in developing new spy tech-
         nologies for the CIA, remembers well the barriers Corona faced. "In the
current state of technical accomplishment, we tend to forget how des-
         perately inexperienced we all were in those early days. Vanguard had
been a profound embarrassment. Thor and Atlas had gone through sim-
     ilar problems when they began. Titan was then experiencing repeated
failures. I had worked on ballistic missile programs in Los Angeles; our
monthly program review meetings were properly called 'Black Satur-
       days.' Upper stages were a new challenge. Our group had tried and
failed three times to build an upper stage for Thor which could send a

payload to the moon."
   Space physics was in its infancy. Fundamental matters like designing
an ascent trajectory that would insert a satellite into orbit required a
whole new set of calculations, different from those needed to send a
           "Go Off and Build               That      Thing"             255

missile from one continent to another. The scientists and engineers had
access to none of the sophisticated tools that are available today. "There
were no integrated circuits, no transistors, no hand-held computers —
only vacuum tubes and electric motors with cam switches," recalled
Sam Araki, who started work at Lockheed in 1958 and was soon as-
       signed to the Corona project. "Engineers had to rely on their slide rules,
Marchant calculators and Frieden calculators for computation. The in-
                  struments they built were also crude. For example, the timer that con-
          trolled the command telemetry readout in orbit was a paper-punch
device driven by an electric motor. It was not unlike the roll used by a

player piano."
   For Plummer, who was supposed to coordinate the work of all the
subcontractors, the absence of precise guidance from the government
was at once exhilarating and terrifying. The terse "Work Statement"
that Bissell had provided in late April was stunningly vague and open-
ended. Few, if any, major technology projects ever sponsored by the
U.S. government have started with such a spare, uncluttered mandate
from Washington. Years later, Plummer was still amazed by the march-
    ing orders. "The entire description of the satellite was in one para-
          graph," he said.
  It was actually a bit longer than Plummer remembered, but not
much. The critical opening sentence read, "Develop and provide, ex-
     cept as specifically set forth below, all equipment, services and facilities
necessary to complete a program of photoreconnaissance of the Soviet
Union." The exceptions were the rocket boosters and other items to be
provided by the Air Force.
   All the details and engineering specifications were left to Plummer
and his colleagues to work out. Itek, which was based near Boston, was
assigned to take long-distance photography outside the earth's atmo-
        sphere, where the stresses on lenses and other camera equipment had
never been tested. As the CIA's long secret history of the project said
with some understatement, "Since nothing was known about the actual
operation of a panoramic camera in an orbiting satellite, a great variety
of technical problems had to be solved by Itek. A testing laboratory had
to be designed and fabricated to simulate operational velocity and alti-
                        256         Secret     Empire


tude in order to check their effect on camera resolution, as well as the
dynamic effect of the camera's operation on the vehicle." Put another
way, the operation of the camera mechanisms might be jarring enough
to throw the whole satellite off course.
   The conditions during launch and space flight would be exceptionally
inhospitable to delicate camera equipment. The violent vibration of the
spacecraft as it rocketed toward orbit was likely to knock crucial pieces
of the camera out of the precise alignment required for detailed picture
taking and might cause the large spools of film to ripple, fracture, or
even melt from friction as strips of film rubbed against each other. The
temperature differential between the surface of the satellite that faced
the sun and the side that did not was expected to be as much as 150 de-
       grees Fahrenheit. The camera itself might experience temperature vari-
         ations ofas much as 50 degrees Fahrenheit from one part to another.
That could easily cause distortion of the lenses and of the curved metal
plates, or platens, that held the film firmly in place during exposure,
throwing the picture out of focus. The vacuum and gravity- free envi-
         ronment promised to add to the difficulties. Indeed, once test flights
began in February 1959, these and a host of other problems hounded
Dick Leghorn's optical experts and camera designers.
   They devised inventive remedies in some cases by substituting differ-
     ent materials. Thermal expansion and contraction problems, for in-
          stance, were alleviated in several parts of the camera by fabricating the
components with titanium, a strong, structurally stable metal, instead of
magnesium, which was more prone to changing shape. Design alter-
       ations were also made to deal with the temperature problems. A single,
honeycomb frame was created to hold the various parts of the camera
rather than three linked frames, eliminating the need for connecting
rods and shafts that were susceptible to misalignment in the tempera-
     ture extremes. The metal platens that held down the film were dis-
        carded infavor of a different, less temperature-sensitive mechanism to
keep the film in place during exposure. The tension on the film spools
was increased to wrap the film more tightly, preventing the welding and
ripping that occurred during launch.
  All these modifications and innovations were expensive and time con-
         "Go Off and Build That Thing"                         257

suming. Itek, which took on the project not long after Leghorn had
transformed it from a university laboratory into a private business, was
not adequately equipped to handle all the design problems. It soon fell
far behind delivery schedules and expenses soared. The CIA was not
pleased.
   Film was another critical and challenging element. The chemists and
other scientists at Eastman Kodak, in Rochester, New York, were famil-
   iar with the rarified world of high-altitude photography from their work
on the U-2 . More recently, they had been working on a new acetate-
based film for the WS-1 17L satellite that had the appropriate sensitiv-
    ity, speed, and resolution for that system. There was, however, a crucial
difference between the WS-1 17L and Corona. The film carried aboard
the WS-1 17L was to be processed aboard the spacecraft, with the pic-
       tures then scanned and beamed electronically back to earth. That re-
          quired amuch more forgiving environment aboard the WS-1 17L. The
satellite chamber would be pressurized and heated to maintain the
proper temperature and humidity range for film processing. Acetate-
based film would work just fine in those conditions.
  In the unpressurized Corona, the solvents in acetate-based film
would essentially vaporize, making the film so brittle it would crumble.
That was a potentially disabling problem because the Corona film
would have to pass through a gauntlet of stops and turns and abrupt
changes in speed as it traveled through the complex Itek camera. "There
was no way that the acetate films could have or would have functioned
correctly, particularly in the intricate film path system of the Corona
program," recalled Don H. Schoessler, who worked on the Corona film
in Kodak's research and engineering department. Indeed, the acetate
film that was used on the first test flights cracked and shattered as ex-
pected.
   At one of BisselFs first monthly meetings, one of the participants,
concerned about film durability, naively asked Schoessler, "Is it possible
to coat emulsion on thin stainless steel to get the strength that we
need?"
   That was probably possible, the Kodak executive replied dryly, but
the steel film would be worthless because light could not pass through it,
                       258        Secret      Empire


making it impossible to print photographs from it. He didn't bother to
mention that the sheer weight of metallic film would be disqualifying.
  The solution was to perfect Estar, the Mylar-based film Kodak had
tried to develop for the U-2 . It would remain sturdy and flexible enough
in space to survive the twists and tugs as it passed through the camera.
The company developed a new fine-grain emulsion coating for the side
of the film that would be exposed to provide the sensitivity, speed, and
resolution needed for space photography. But Schoessler and his col-
         leagues also had to make sure the film would move smoothly through
the camera and would not curl during processing. This was accom-
        plished byapplying a thin coating to the back of the film that, among
other things, contained fine glass particles. These tiny beads prevented
the film, which would be stored in 6,000-foot rolls, from becoming
sticky.
   Pressure to pack as much film as possible aboard the satellite inspired
other innovations. A new ultrasonic technique was developed to splice
long sheets of Estar film together to make the large rolls stowed on the
satellites. This was no easy trick because the splice points, which nor-
        mally would be weak and uneven, had to be strong enough and thin
enough to run smoothly through the camera and spooling system. Con-
          ventional splicing methods were unacceptable. Special production
equipment was used throughout the film manufacturing process to en-
    sure uniform thinness.

  All of Itek and Kodak's work, of course, would be wasted if the film
never made it back to earth. That was General Electric's nightmare.
The company's Space Re-entry Program Division in Philadelphia,
under subcontract to Lockheed, faced numerous engineering chal-
         lenges. Its job was to design and build a self-contained pod within the
Agena that could ferry the film safely to earth. This module, known as
the satellite recovery vehicle, was a precursor to the Project Mercury
capsules that Alan Shepard and John Glenn and their fellow astronauts
rode into space a few years later. Indeed, the work that was done to de-
       velop the Corona capsules was invaluable to NASA as it put together the
first manned spacecraft.
          "Go Off and Build            That     Thing"           259

  To ensure tight security for the project, General Electric bought and
refurbished a large, six-story warehouse from the A&P grocery chain at
32nd and Chestnut Street near downtown Philadelphia.
   Perhaps even more than the camera system and film, the satellite re-
        covery vehicle involved radical new technologies. There was no model
to work with, no existing equipment that could be modified, nothing
that could be borrowed from an earlier reconnaissance program. "G.E.
had never built anything like that," Plummer said. Though a handful of
Soviet and American satellites had been placed in orbit, none had been
brought back to earth. The reason was not just the extreme heat gener-
     ated during reentry, which would reach 4,000 degrees Fahrenheit as the
capsule plunged through the thickening air at 350,000 feet. There were
also complex engineering and guidance problems. The bucket-shaped
film capsule had to be detached from the Agena and lined up in just the
right position to put it on a precise path back to earth.
   There was no margin for error in the sequence of maneuvers that fell
under the technical heading of orbit ejection. Mistakes could — and
did — send the film capsule spinning off into a higher orbit or start it
down a descent trajectory that deposited it thousands of miles from the
designated recovery area. Just such a malfunction in one of the early test
flights shot the capsule higher into space, where ground stations lost
track of it. Several years later it was spotted, still circling the earth.
Other orbit ejection mistakes sent return capsules plummeting into
Arctic regions and the jungles of Venezuela.
   The satellite recovery vehicle actually served four distinct roles. On
launch, the vehicle, which was mounted atop the Agena, acted as a heat-
resistant nose cone during the rapid acceleration through the atmo-
         sphere. During orbit, the vehicle provided thermal and light protection
for the reentry capsule, where the film was stored after exposure. Once
the picture taking was completed, the vehicle with its precious cargo of
film was supposed to separate from the Agena and conduct a complex
series of spins and turns to align itself for reentry and brake its speed to
commence the descent to earth. Finally, after retrorockets and other
guidance equipment was shed, the film capsule had to survive the fiery
                         260        Secret      Empire


plunge through the atmosphere and deploy a series of parachutes to de-
        celerate enough so that specially outfitted planes could pluck it from the
sky.

   The separation and deorbiting phases were the trickiest. General
Electric engineers placed the propulsion and guidance devices that
would execute these crucial steps on a conical aluminum structure called
the thrust cone. It was, in effect, the power pack for the film capsule.
The cone, which was bolted to the bottom of the film capsule, was de-
        signed tolift the capsule free of the Agena, spin it up, and stabilize it in
the proper position for reentry and then reduce its speed by 1,300 feet
per second so it would fall from orbit. All this would have to happen in a
rapid series of steps.
   While in orbit, the whole spacecraft would fly backward in a horizon-
    tal position, with the Agena's rocket exhaust nozzle leading the way. Just
before separation, the spacecraft would rotate into a vertical position,
with the rocket nozzle on top and the tip of the satellite, including the
recovery vehicle, at the bottom, facing the earth. At that point, explosive
bolts would fire, separating the thrust cone and film capsule from the
rest of the satellite, which by this late stage in the mission had no further
function. The camera, for instance, was too heavy and big to try to bring
back to earth. After separation, small gas jets would be activated to ma-
         neuver the vehicle into the correct position for ignition of the retro-
rockets, which would fire for ten seconds. The thrust cone itself would
then be jettisoned, and the capsule would soon begin the free-fall back
to earth.

   General Electric's engineers knew the sudden braking of the capsule
as it hit the atmosphere would generate not just extreme heat but also
powerful g- forces, possibly as high as lOgs, subjecting the craft to
tremendous strains. The peak would come as the capsule streaked
through an altitude of about 140,000 feet. Fortunately, by this point, it
would contain few components vulnerable to breakage. It was basically
just a sealed, reinforced bucket covered by a heat shield and equipped
with two parachutes and a simple navigational beacon. The first and
smaller of the parachutes — only 7 feet wide — was designed to deploy at
60,000 feet. Its job was to reduce the rate of descent enough so that the
          "Go Off and Build             That    Thing"            261

main parachute could be safely activated. The appearance of the
smaller, deceleration parachute also triggered separation of the heat
shield, which was no longer needed, from the capsule. A few seconds
later, the main parachute would unfurl, at first in compressed, or reefed,
form to reduce the strain on it, then in a fully opened position that
brought its 30-foot span into play. By this point, in theory, the capsule
would be descending slowly enough that aircraft operating between
10,000 and 20,000 feet could close in to hook the parachute lines and
winch the capsule into the cargo bay.
   This was easier said than done. Intercepting an object falling through
the air, even one slowed by a parachute, requires great piloting skill and
a specially equipped airplane. The plan devised for Corona was based on
techniques developed to recover the camera-carrying Genetrix spy bal-
      loons that the Air Force had tried to float eastward across the Soviet
Union from Western Europe in 1956 to take photographs of military
bases. Some of the balloons that the jet stream carried all the way to the
Pacific were caught in midair by C- 1 1 9 airplanes trailing a trapeze from
their cargo bays. The stubby, twin-propeller plane, known as the Flying
Boxcar, had a cruising speed of 200 mph. In theory, if a pilot maneu-
       vered his plane so that it passed just above the descending parachute, the
trapeze dangling from the rear of the plane would catch the parachute
and its rigging, which would then be winched into the aircraft along
with the film capsule.
   As the satellite was taking shape in the summer of 1958, the Air Force
assembled a group of pilots, most of whom had worked in the balloon

recovery program, to prepare for the new recovery operations off"
Hawaii. The 6593rd Test Squadron (Special) was formed and sent to
Edwards Air Force Base in California for initial training. Crews were
told they would be recovering missile nose cones. Most crew members
doubted the plan would work.
   Harry Conway was not one of the doubters. During World War II he
had dreamed up an improbable system for rescuing American pilots
downed in enemy territory. Conway's idea was to outfit pilots with a
harness and a rope that could be strung between two trees or poles. A
rescue plane outfitted with a tailhook would sweep in low over the
                        262         Secret     Empire


ground, catch the rope, and jerk the pilot off the ground to safety. To
convince skeptical colleagues, Conway demonstrated the device himself
a dozen times. He survived the sudden acceleration from zero to 140
mph as he was violently lifted off the ground. Conway was assigned to
the 6593rd Test Squadron.
   Early rehearsals at Edwards were not encouraging. The sink rate of
the main parachute — 3 3 feet per second — was too fast. At that speed, pi-
      lots couldn't line up their planes to intercept the training capsules
dropped from balloons and high-altitude airplanes. If they missed on
the first pass, there was not time to make a second run before the capsule
landed. The parachute was redesigned to reduce the sink rate and the
crews began to have better luck. At the end of 1958, the squadron began
to move to Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii, where it would be based.
  Jim Plummer's job in Palo Alto was not only to coordinate the work
of the geographically dispersed subcontractors such as Kodak, G.E.,
and Itek, but also to fit all the hardware together into a functioning
satellite. In today's world of precision space engineering, men and
women working in white plastic suits in carefully sanitized rooms as-
         semble highly sophisticated satellites according to painstakingly plotted
plans. In Plummer's day, the engineers often made it up as they went
along, using hammers and wrenches to make adjustments on the fly.
Every pound shaved from the satellite meant another pound of film
could be added. "In the very early days there were times when filing,
chipping and sawing away the excess were the only solutions," the CIA
noted in its history of the project.
  In aerospace terminology, Plummer was responsible for assembling
the payload — in this case the package of reconnaissance gear and recov-
    ery equipment that would ride into space atop the rocket. Weight and
space were tightly limited. In effect, everything had to fit snugly into a
compact metal tube that would be mated to the Agena rocket at the
launch base. Plummer thought of it as a big football that had to be fitted
with equipment and mounted on the Agena. If the satellite was too
heavy, the two-stage rocket wouldn't be able to lift it into orbit. Yet it
had to be roomy enough to contain the camera system, large roll of film,
          "Go Off and Build              That     Thing"            263

and propulsion, guidance, and communications systems, as well as the
recovery vehicle.
   Plummer was pretty much starting from scratch, since no one had
built anything quite like this before. Even before the first components
were delivered to Palo Alto, the Lockheed engineers were working on
how best to configure the various pieces inside the satellite and how to
protect the delicate machinery throughout the turbulent flight. Fabri-
       cation ofthe satellite shell and internal structures, and testing of various
components, was done whenever possible at the building in Palo Alto,
where access was restricted to employees who had been cleared to work
on the project. Some fabrication and testing, however, had to be done at
Lockheed's main Northern California manufacturing plant in Sunny-
      vale, where the Agena rockets were built. The plant housed large ther-
     mal and altitude test chambers that were needed to expose various
pieces of the satellite to the kind of punishing conditions they would
face during the launch, orbit, and descent phases of flight. To maintain
secrecy, Plummer arranged for the work to be done by a hand-picked
crew in the middle of the night.
   While work on the satellite was slowly progressing, preparation of a
launch site was advancing on the seacoast near Lompoc, just south of
Point Arguello, 150 miles northwest of Los Angeles. The continent
comes to an end along this secluded section of the central California
coast in a desolate yet arresting terrain of sandy hills, empty beaches,
and scrub brush stunted by powerful Pacific winds. In the fog, which
often cloaks the area in a chilly mist, the landscape is ghostly and forbid-
       ding. Until 1941, the area was occupied mostly by large ranches that
dated back to Mexican land grants early in the nineteenth century. After
the German Blitzkrieg in Europe in the opening months of World War
II demonstrated the brutal efficiency of tank warfare, the U.S. Army
needed a large, remote tract of undeveloped land to train armored and
infantry units. The area around Lompoc seemed perfect, and the Army
acquired control of 86,000 acres by March 1941. It named the base
Camp Cooke, in honor of Maj. Gen. Philip St. George Cooke, a nine-
             teenth-century Army cavalry officer who fought in the Mexican War,
                        264        Secret      Empire


the Indian Wars, and the Civil War, and opened the first wagon trail to
California in 1847. In 1957, the Army turned the sprawling reservation
over to the Air Force for use as a missile base and training center. It was
renamed Vandenberg Air Force Base, after Gen. Hoyt S. Vandenberg,
the Air Force chief of staff from 1948 to 1953.
  The site suited the Air Force because its remoteness would enhance
security and its location would permit launches over the ocean, elimi-
        nating the possibility that malfunctioning or misdirected rockets might
strike populated areas. The first landmass that an errant missile could
hit on a southwestward course over the Pacific was Antarctica. Equally
important, southerly launches from Vandenberg would put a satellite
into polar orbit, bringing it over the polar regions each time it circled
the earth. This was the ideal path for monitoring the Soviet Union. Be-
       cause ofthe earth's easterly rotation, a new swath of the planet would re-
      volve into view with each pass of the satellite overhead. In the case of the
polar orbit planned for the Corona satellites, eight revolutions around
the earth would give the cameras a look at most of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, starting in the Soviet far east and moving west. A polar
orbit offered the added advantage of crossing over the recovery zone off
Hawaii. If the reentry sequence was activated as the Agena flew over
Alaska on a southward course, the film capsule, in theory, would come
down just north of Hawaii.
  The main drawback to Vandenberg was a heavily used Southern Pa-
     cific rail line that cut across the base. The tracks carried a crowded
schedule of freight and passenger trains. For safety and security reasons,
rocket and missile launches were banned whenever a train was on base.
At some hours of the day, the time available for a launch was no more
than a few minutes.
   By the time the Corona project was initiated, the Air Force had built
five Thor launch pads at Vandenberg, operated by the 672nd Strategic
Missile Squadron. Two pads, located in an area of the base known as
Space Launch Complex 1 West, were chosen for the secret satellite.
The complex sits on a windswept bluff covered with saw grass and sage-
     brush just a few hundred yards from the beach. A visitor to the site today
finds only the decaying relics of a place that once commanded the ur-
         "Go Off and Build           That    Thing"           265


gent attention of the nation's top officials. Rattlesnakes nest among the
cracked concrete foundations and large rusting metal plates that mark
the site of the launch pad itself. The remains of the original launch shel-
    ter still stand nearby. A Quonset-style building housed the Thor-Agena
two-stage rockets in a horizontal position before they were lifted up-
       right day
             a   or two before launch. Barn owls now occupy the gutted shel-
    ter. Pieces of two block houses stand on either side of the launch pad.
Protected by thick blast walls, the buildings contained the instruments
and other equipment that controlled the launch sequence.
   Back in the late 1950s, the launch site swarmed with technicians from
Lockheed and Douglas Aircraft, the maker of the Thor booster, and an
assortment of Air Force officers. They were divided into two classes: a
small number of men who knew about the real purpose of the Corona
project, and the rest of the workers, who did not. Keeping the secret at a
work site where people without special security clearances mingled
freely with more privileged technicians was no easy trick.
   Since the presence of a payload atop the rockets was impossible to
miss, the CIA and Air Force made no effort to hide that fact. Indeed, the
Air Force advertised it, peddling the cover story that the satellites were
part of a biomedical experiment to test the effects of space flight on mice
and other animals in preparation for sending human beings into space.
   There was, however, at least one feature on the Agena that hinted at
other purposes. The side of the satellite contained a camera port that
would open in orbit to permit picture taking. Fearful that the port
would give away the nature of the satellite, Plummer and his colleagues
in Palo Alto came up with a Rube Goldberg solution made out of paper,
piano strings, and Ping-Pong balls. The idea was to cover the port with
the paper while the rocket was sitting on the launch pad. Piano strings
with Ping-Pong balls attached at either end would be fitted under the
paper. One of Plummer's engineers figured that the air turbulence cre-
     ated around the rocket as it lifted off would exert enough force on the
Ping-Pong balls to pull them and the paper free of the satellite.
   To test the plan, the engineer mounted the paper contraption on the
windshield of his German sports car late one night and headed out to
the Bayshore Freeway. As he approached 90 mph, he was pulled over by
                        266        Secret      Empire


the California Highway Patrol and ticketed for speeding. Corona
records do not indicate what explanation he gave for the paper and
Ping-Pong balls. The cover was used on one early test flight, without
success. As the rocket roared out of sight, the paper was still stuck to the
satellite. Fortunately, no picture taking was planned on the flight.
   To deflect speculation about the project at Vandenberg and among
the companies involved, the government and private contractors en-
       gaged in a number of diversionary activities. Lockheed technicians
cleared to work on Corona, for instance, were instructed to shower col-
        leagues who were not cleared with questions about all kinds of scientific
issues. The inquiries were supposed to create the impression that mat-
      ters like magnetic fields and spacecraft maneuverability were the focus
of the flights. Anyone at Vandenberg who spotted the camera ports was
told the satellite did carry a camera but that it was to be used for astro-
         nomical observation. "There were hundreds of people who worked
for the program who didn't have a clue that there was a camera on
board," recalled Frank Buzard, one of the senior managers of the
Corona project.
   Though the satellite could be created in secret, and the launch pads
prepared out of public sight, there was no way to keep the launches
themselves secret. The thunderous noise from the rocket engines would
extend far beyond the boundaries of Vandenberg, and the fiery exhaust
produced as the Thor boosters climbed through the sky would be visible
up and down the central California coast. As the first launch date ap-
         proached at the end of 1958, the Pentagon needed a plausible public ex-
                planation. To shield Corona, a largely fictitious program of space
exploration was fashioned along the lines of the "second story" sub-
        terfuge that Col. Fritz Oder had originally proposed in the summer of
1957. Part of the Oder plan called for having the Air Force announce its
own scientific satellite project sometime after it publicly canceled part
of the WS-1 17L program. Now, in December 1958, the second act un-
       folded with the formal unveiling of Project Discoverer, ostensibly a new
Air Force program that would study the effects of space travel on mice
and monkeys as well as refine the techniques required to bring a space-
     craft back to earth. All the Corona launches were publicly identified by
          "Go Off and Build              That     Thing"            267

the Pentagon as Discoverer flights. To maintain the fiction for anyone
who was following the launches, including the Soviet Union, some early
missions actually carried mice or mechanical creatures that were sup-
       posed to mimic the behavior of mice.
  The Advanced Research Projects Agency held a news conference in
Washington on December 3, 1958, to inform reporters about Project
Discoverer. The carefully orchestrated disinformation strategy pre-
      pared for the briefing was spelled out in top secret papers. One put it
this way: "The objective of this information plan is to insure that the
various launchings in Project Discoverer receive news treatment related
to their actual missions. Public releases on the project will be strictly
controlled to insure such treatment. In particular, these flights must be
disassociated with any U.S. reconnaissance program for which they
have no capability."
   The inaugural public statement said: "The initial launchings primar-
    ily will be to test the vehicle itself, especially its propulsion and guid-
         ance. Later, the satellites will contain biomedical specimens to seek data
on environmental conditions which will be useful to the man-in-space
program being carried out jointly by the Advanced Research Projects
Agency and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. As
part of this program, live animals also will be carried aloft and their re-
      covery attempted in order to develop the techniques involved."
  To give briefers precise answers for a variety of questions that might
come up, the Pentagon prepared a script for them to follow.
  "Question: Is the Discoverer a reconnaissance satellite?"
  "Answer: No."
  "Question: Why is Discoverer being placed in polar orbit?"
  "Answer: Polar orbit is the only one from Vandenberg AFB with
hardware presently available. Eastward launch from Vandenberg is pre-
       vented bysafety considerations. Launch to the West would entail an un-
         acceptable speed penalty."
  Long before the Pentagon unveiled the Discoverer program at its
news conference, word had filtered through Washington about govern-
      ment efforts to perfect reconnaissance satellites. The WS-1 17L project
was an open secret. Early in 1958, General Schriever in secret testimony
                        268        Secret     Empire


had told Lyndon Johnson's preparedness subcommittee that the Air
Force was working on a reconnaissance satellite with a recoverable cap-
     sule. He was referring to Program IIA, the variant of the WS- 1 1 7L that
had been belatedly initiated in late 1957 as problems mounted with the
original video transmission system. A few days after his appearance, a
sanitized transcript was circulated to reporters. The New York Times de-
        scribed Schriever's testimony in a front-page story on January 15, 1958.
   By the end of the year, John W. Finney, a tenacious reporter who
tracked military space programs for the New York Times, was familiar
enough with the satellite scene from technical journals and congres-
      sional sources to add some knowledgeable perspective to the Pentagon's
bland announcement about Discoverer. Finney later recalled, "I didn't
know about Corona — I never heard of Corona at the time — but I
viewed Discoverer as an incremental step toward the development of a
military reconnaissance satellite."
   His story about the Pentagon news conference on December 3
opened with a straightforward account of the announcement. "The De-
      fense Department announced today a long-range satellite program
aimed at placing mice, monkeys, then man in space.
   "The first satellite in the program, known as Project Discoverer, is
scheduled to be launched within the next month from the Vandenberg
Air Force base."
   A few paragraphs later, Finney gave readers a hint of what else might
be going on. "The Defense Department will be seeking basic informa-
     tion for use in future practical satellites, such as reconnaissance and
early warning satellites, navigational, communications and weather
satellites, and recoverable space capsules."
   The spy pedigree of the program was clear to anyone who had been
following the WS-1 17L project. As Aviation Week noted in its account
of the December 3 announcement, "The Discoverer program has been
completely separated from the WS-117L Sentry program. Originally,
Sentry satellites were scheduled to carry photographic, infrared, radar
and other types of reconnaissance instrumentation as well as that
needed for the general research work that comes under the Discoverer."
  Aviation Week reported that one of the program's initial goals was to
         "Go Off and Build          That    Thing"         269

return a satellite to a predetermined landing area of about 200 square
miles.
  Finney and his counterparts at Aviation Week were digging close to
Corona, but they didn't spot it. As 1958 came to a close, Bissell was
ready to move ahead with the first launch, confident that the secret
would hold. He expected the first working satellite to be in operation by
spring. He was off by more than a year.
                     CHAPTER            THIRTEEN




                          Heartbreak

 As 1959 began, Eisenhower was hamstrung by charges that the
ii Soviet Union, with its advances in rocket technology, had opened
a "missile gap" with the United States. Criticism of the administration
was mounting, the Corona project was limping ahead, and pressure was
growing by the day to resume U-2 flights over Soviet territory. For a
man who fervently did not want to risk use of the U-2 for fear of in-
         creasing tensions with Moscow or even igniting a war, it was not a happy
confluence of events. Several times during the spring and summer,
Eisenhower found himself alone in his opposition to renewed use of the
U-2, rejecting the advice of almost all his top military and intelligence
advisers, including the secretary of defense, the chairman of the Joint

Chiefs of Staff", and the director of central intelligence. It was a power-
     ful, if short-lived, example of adamantly independent presidential
decision-making.
   "Dad used to say that he did better when he followed his hunches
than when he listened to his advisers," his son and aide, John Eisen-
      hower, said of the president's wary attitude about the U-2 . "We knew we
were going to run out of luck sometime. It was like a bomber pilot
bombing Germany: How many missions is that rabbit's foot going to

   Eisenhower himself later publicly advertised his qualms about the
 last?"
U-2. In his White House memoirs, he offered a correct if somewhat
self-congratulatory account: "Of those concerned, I was the only princi-
     pal who consistently expressed a conviction that if ever one of the planes
fell in Soviet territory a wave of excitement mounting almost to panic
                                      270
                         Heartbreak               271


would sweep the world, inspired by the standard Soviet claim of injus-
    tice, unfairness, aggression and ruthlessness."
  The first attempt to get the Corona project into the air could hardly
have been less auspicious. In fact, the initial attempt to launch the two-
stage Thor-Agena rocket on January 2 1 , 1959, was so disappointing that
it was not even officially counted as the first launch. Informally, it was
known as Discoverer Zero. Sixty minutes before blast-off, the count-
       down was proceeding smoothly when technicians initiated a planned
test of the hydraulic mechanisms on the Agena engine. As electric
power was applied to the system, the Agena, still very much anchored to
the earth, suddenly began acting as if it was already well on its way into
space. A set of small, auxiliary rocket engines, known as ullage rockets,
fired. Their purpose was to give the Agena a jolt forward after it sepa-
       rated from the Thor to force the liquid fuel for the main engines to the
bottom of the fuel tanks so it could flow at the proper pressure level into
the engines. At the same time, the explosive bolts that were designed to
separate the Agena from the Thor detonated. These events were pro-
          grammed to take place in the sky once the Thor had completed its burn.
Luckily, the Agena did not topple off the Thor and there was no explo-
      sion, but the ullage rocket firing damaged the guidance system of the
Thor. The mishap, attributed to a problem in the electrical circuits of
the Agena, forced Bissell and Plummer to revise the launch schedule.
The government's secret history of the project reports that "Eisen-
      hower upbraided Bissell personally" after the failed launch.
  The second effort a month later was also unsuccessful — this time the
rocket got off the pad, but the engineers were never sure whether the
payload reached orbit. "I signed the report that said it went into orbit,
but I'm really convinced that it went into the South Pacific," said Frank
Buzard, one of the top Corona managers. Eisenhower began pressing
Allen Dulles about the problems, according to CIA records. The second
launch, which was given the official designation of Discoverer I, carried
no camera or return capsule.
  If Eisenhower was testy and impatient — some aides dispute the CIA
account and there is certainly abundant evidence that he stood by the
program during its bleakest days — it would have been understandable.
                        272        Secret      Empire


Washington was awash with missile gap anxiety as Bissell and his crew
were staggering toward space. There could be no more dangerous
threat to American security than a significant Soviet advantage in long-
range missiles. If true, it would bring the Eisenhower presidency to an
end precisely where it had begun, with the ominous prospect of a devas-
       tating surprise attack.
   The charge was equally explosive as a political issue. Presidential
elections were coming in 1960, and the Republican Party, absent Eisen-
         hower, would be facing the electorate without a popular incumbent
president and war hero on the national ticket. The last thing the Repub-
      lican nominee would want to confront was a credible Democratic accu-
        sation that the Eisenhower administration had let the Russians achieve

military superiority. As Eisenhower's vice president, Richard Nixon, the
likely Republican candidate, would be particularly vulnerable on that
score. Senators John E Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, and Stuart
Symington, along with other aspiring Democrats, were well aware that
the "missile gap" could be one of the decisive issues of the campaign.
   Eisenhower himself doubted the claim. The intelligence information
he saw, including reports based on the U-2's admittedly incomplete cov-
       erage of Soviet territory, offered no hard evidence that the Russians
were amassing large numbers of long-range missiles or were about to
gain a critical military edge over the United States. In January 1958,
when Washington was still reeling from the Sputnik launches and
Moscow's first successful test of an intercontinental missile, he had told
the nation in his State of the Union address: "At this moment, the con-
        sensus ofopinion is that we are probably somewhat behind the Soviets
in some areas of long-range ballistic missile development. But it is my
conviction, based on close study of all relevant intelligence, with the
best information that scientists can bring to me, that if we make the nec-
       essary effort, we will have the missiles in the needed quantity and in time
to sustain and strengthen the deterrent power of our increasingly effi-
     cient bombers."
  Even if the Russians were producing a modest missile fleet, Eisen-
       hower believed that Moscow would not risk starting a war unless it was
confident it could quickly eliminate the possibility of a retaliatory at-
                           Heartbreak                273


tack. He did not think the Soviet Union could reach that threshold. In

early 1958, Eisenhower had assured a scientific advisory panel, "Until
an enemy has enough operational capability to destroy most of our
bases simultaneously and thus prevent retaliation by us, our deterrent
remains effective."
   The "missile gap" clamor had been building for years. In the broadest
terms, fear of Soviet superiority in long-range missiles dated back to the
opening years of the Eisenhower administration. The CIA had raised
the issue in one of its first examinations of Soviet missiles in late 1954.

That highly classified report said, "We believe that the USSR, looking
forward to a period, possibly in the next few years, when long-range
bombers may no longer be a feasible means of attacking heavily de-
        fended US targets, will make a concerted effort to produce an Intercon-
           tinental Ballistic Missile. In this event it probably could have ready for
series production in about 1963 (or at the earliest possible date in 1960)
an IBM with a high yield nuclear warhead. . . . Advent of the IBM would
create an entirely new type of threat to the US. Attacks upon the
launching sites are the only countermeasures now known or in prospect.
If the USSR should develop such a missile and produce it in consider-
      able numbers before the US developed adequate counterweapons or
countermeasures, the USSR would acquire such a military advantage as
to constitute an extremely grave threat to US security."
   Concern about long-range Soviet missiles grew steadily through the
mid-1950s, but fears hardened in 1957 after the Russians announced in
August of that year that they had successfully tested an intercontinental
missile, the liquid-fueled SS-6. That test was followed quickly by the or-
        biting ofSputnik I and II in the fall, proving that Soviet rockets were far
more advanced than American models. At the end of November, CIA
analysts secretly predicted that the Russians could field a prototype in-
                tercontinental missile by mid- 195 8 and increase the number to ten by
the end of that year. The same intelligence paper said that the Kremlin
could marshal sufficient industrial resources to install fifty long-range
missiles at launch bases by October 1959, push the total to one hundred
by January 1960, and reach a level of five hundred missiles by the end
1960.
                         274         Secret       Empire


  The issue got a fresh splash of publicity in the closing days of 1957,
not long after the launch of the heavier, dog-ferrying Sputnik II, when
Chalmers Roberts of the Washington Post disclosed the secret findings of
the Gaither report, the work of a presidential commission on civil de-
      fense that was initially headed by H. Rowan Gaither Jr., the chairman of
the Ford Foundation. The Post reported that the commission found the
United States was "in the gravest danger in its history. ... It shows an
America exposed to an almost immediate threat from the missile-
bristling Soviet Union." Among many ominous observations, the report
warned that by late 1959, Moscow would likely be able to launch a
knockout attack against the United States with one hundred interconti-
       nental missiles carrying nuclear warheads. The Gaither panel, like the
Killian committee and other groups that had examined the state of
American military strength, recommended accelerating the missile pro-
             grams. Italso urged a variety of steps to reduce the nation's vulnerabil-
    ity to nuclear attack, including the dispersal of Strategic Air Command
bases and a crash program to build fallout shelters. Though Eisenhower
thought the Gaither report was overdrawn, and refused to make it pub-
    lic, he followed its advice on missiles and bomber bases. He rejected the
plan for fallout shelters.
   After the Gaither report bombshell, the missile gap quickly built into
an irresistible issue for the Democrats as they prepared for congres-
       sional elections in 1958 and the presidential contest two years later. At
the end of January 1958, Senator Lyndon Johnson's military prepared-
      ness subcommittee concluded a series of high-profile hearings with a
blistering report that said the United States had fallen far behind the
Soviet Union in missile power.
   Conservative Republicans, long concerned that the Eisenhower ad-
                    ministration had underestimated Moscow's military prowess and short-
           changed the Pentagon, raised their own alarms. Joseph Alsop, the
syndicated columnist and Bissell's Groton school chum, suggested in
July 1958 that the missile gap would soon grow to frightening dimen-
       sions. By 1962, he predicted in a widely read column, Moscow would
have 1,500 intercontinental missiles, Washington just 130. Because
Alsop and his brother and fellow columnist Stewart Alsop were known
                          Heartbreak               275


to be wired into the CIA through long-standing friendships with men
like Bissell and Allen Dulles, the missile numbers they cited were ac-
        cepted as gospel in many quarters in Washington.
  In fact, the Alsop numbers mirrored those in the most recent top se-
     cret estimate of future Soviet missile forces, which was completed in
June. Eisenhower, Allen Dulles, and others, however, weren't sure the
Russians could move that fast. They recognized that official estimates
projecting the size of the Kremlin arsenal in the years ahead were essen-
      tially educated guesses based on estimates of Soviet industrial capacity
and intent. As of mid- 195 8, Washington could not confirm the exis-
      tence of even a single operational intercontinental missile base in the
Soviet Union. If that was correct — the CIA and other intelligence agen-
     cies had no way of knowing for sure — it was reasonable to believe that
the Russians would be lucky to get twenty or thirty long-range missiles
ready for use before the end of the decade. But it wasn't easy to intro-
     duce amore nuanced analysis as the alarm grew, or to indicate that some
analysts believed the Russians were actually moving very slowly. When-
      ever someone tried, it usually backfired, reinforcing the impression of
confusion and indecision within the administration.
  The hubbub was amplified by a bitter debate between the CIA and
the Air Force that seemed to break into the open whenever administra-
     tion officials were summoned to Capitol Hill to testify about Soviet mis-
        siles. The CIA, relying largely on a close examination of images
produced by the U-2, did not see evidence of a large buildup of inter-
           continental missiles. The Air Force, which also had access to some U-2
photographs as well as some of its own independent sources of informa-
     tion, said it was convinced the Russians were building missiles at a rapid
rate. How much the Air Force numbers were influenced by the service's
desire to increase its budget is impossible to know. But there is little
doubt that the generals wielded the higher figures both to impress Con-
     gress with the importance of funding Air Force missile programs and to
prod the country into reckoning with a threat many officers thought the
White House was neglecting. As a former secretary of the Air Force,
Senator Symington was a willing megaphone for the service's concerns.
  This kind of massaging of intelligence information to serve bureau-
                          276         Secret       Empire


cratic, ideological, or other interests was not new, and it continues to
this day. Every administration prefers to receive intelligence informa-
      tion that justifies and supports its foreign and military policies. Some,
like the administration of Ronald Reagan, have pushed the CIA and its
fellow spy agencies to bend intelligence reports to conform with policy.
Others, like the Eisenhower administration, were more content to let
the estimates fall where they might. The manipulation goes on within
departments as well, especially at the Pentagon, where the Army, Navy,
Marine Corps, and Air Force compete for dollars. As the newest of the
armed services in the 1950s, and the one charged most directly with re-
               sponding to a Soviet nuclear attack, the Air Force was especially aggres-
    sive in making the case for budget increases.
  The Russians, who could follow the missile debate in the American
press, did their best to stoke it. Just two months before the first Corona
misfire in January 1959, a Russian diplomat announced in Geneva that
mass production of Soviet intercontinental missiles had begun. A few
days later, Khrushchev declared that he had a missile that could deliver
a 5-megaton warhead to a target 8,000 miles away. On January 27, 1959,
less than a week after the ullage rocket malfunction at Vandenberg, the
Soviet leader opened a Soviet Communist Party congress by boasting
that Moscow's rockets had shifted the balance of power in favor of the
Kremlin. Echoing the words of the Russian diplomat in Geneva, he
claimed "serial production of intercontinental ballistic rockets has been

organized."
   American officials had no way of knowing at the time that the Rus-
      sians were bluffing. The SS-6 boosters, a version of the same rocket that
was used to launch the Sputnik satellites, though plenty powerful, were
ill-suited for warfare because the fuels that powered them — kerosene
and liquid oxygen — were difficult to handle and couldn't be stored for
long in rocket fuel tanks. This meant that the missiles would have to be
fueled shortly before launching, a cumbersome, time-consuming
process that was impractical if nuclear war was breaking out. American
boosters like the Thor and Atlas suffered from the same problem. Real-
      izing that solid-fueled missiles would be much more dependable and ef-
             ficient, and could be fired from underground silos that would be
                         Heartbreak                 277


difficult to disable with air strikes, both nations were rushing to develop
such rockets by the late 1950s. What Washington did not realize at the
time was that the Kremlin was simply not building many SS-6s, prefer-
      ring to await the arrival of the solid-fuel models. All the talk about the
mass production of missiles was mostly bluster. But in the absence of
hard intelligence, Washington was powerless to determine what was
fact and what was fiction. Given the Soviet feats in space and the missile
tests at Tyuratam, the missile test center in the Soviet republic of Ka-
           zakhstan, there was reason to fear that Moscow was intent on building
intercontinental missiles as fast as it could.

  The Eisenhower administration didn't help matters by providing in-
          consistent and sometimes disquieting information itself. Allen Dulles
informed members of the Senate Armed Services Committee in secret
testimony on January 16, 1959, that the Soviet Union was likely to field
ten or so prototype intercontinental missiles before the end of the year.
He predicted that Moscow could produce an arsenal of five hundred
long-range missiles by 1962 and might even reach that total a year ear-
     lier. Neil McElroy, the secretary of defense, told a news conference on
January 22 that American intelligence estimates contradicted Soviet
claims. A week later, he startled Washington by saying that the United
States was voluntarily dropping out of the competition to match the So-
     viet Union in the number of long-range, land-based missiles. Instead of
relying primarily on intercontinental missiles, he said, Washington
would develop a diversified arsenal that also included bombers and mis-
     siles launched from submarines. General Schriever, appearing at the
same Senate hearing as McElroy, took exception to the announcement.
"In view of the very great danger, we should be building larger ICBM
forces. We have the capacity to build more."
   It wasn't every day that a top general openly quarreled with the secre-
      tary of defense. The disagreement seemed to underscore the confusion
within the administration about the state of Soviet missile programs and
how the United States should respond to them. While McElroy was
technically correct in suggesting that a blend of bombers and land- and
sea-based missiles — often called the triad of nuclear forces — was Wash-
         ington's best answer to the Soviet threat, the declaration that the United
                         278         Secret      Empire


States was not going to match Moscow's quantity of missiles was politi-
      cally unwise, to say the least. It merely fanned concern about the missile
gap, and like the administration's feeble first response to Sputnik in Oc-
       tober 1957, left the unfair public impression that Eisenhower and his
aides were sleepwalking through the cold war. The front-page headline
in the next day's New York Times captured the muddy message: "McEl-
roy Says U.S. Won't Race Soviet In Making ICBM's; Air General Dis-

agrees."
  Senator Johnson and his Democratic colleagues, always on the look-
    out for an opening to criticize the White House, pounced on the con-
            flicting statements. Senator Stuart Symington said he was astonished by
McElroy's comments. Senator Johnson, who was presiding over the
Senate hearings, summoned top intelligence officials to Capitol Hill
later in the week for a closed meeting of the preparedness subcommittee
to explain why the CIA had just lowered its estimates of the number of
long-range Soviet missiles. The Democrats on the panel suspected that
the administration was soft-pedaling the Soviet threat to justify limita-
      tions on defense spending, or as Symington would say a year later to
make the same point, "The intelligence books have been juggled so that
the budget books can be balanced." Eisenhower, as he had throughout
his presidency, was trying to hold down military costs. Senator Syming-
    ton charged that the CIA's numbers had been radically and artificially
reduced over recent months.
  The complaints irritated Eisenhower. He sounded off during a meet-
   ing with Killian, Land, and Edward Purcell, the Harvard physicist, on
February 10. It wasn't just the unauthorized disclosure of classified in-
              formation, hesaid, or the presentation of a distorted picture of Ameri-
    can defenses that bothered him. There was another issue, one that
increasingly worried the president and would later serve as the theme of
his farewell address to the nation: the growing power of the military-
industrial complex. "The munitions makers are making tremendous ef-
       forts toward getting more contracts and in fact seem to be exerting
undue influence over the Senators," Eisenhower told his guests. He sin-
     gled out Symington, noting that the Missouri senator often seemed to
                          Heartbreak                279


be accompanied about Washington by a vice president of Convair, the
manufacturer of the Atlas missile.

   At first glance, Eisenhower's concerns might seem odd coming from
a man so steeped in the military culture himself. Building more arms
and expanding America's industrial base hardly seem like issues that
would alarm a former wartime commander. For Eisenhower, however,
the prospect of ever-increasing defense expenditures, spurred by the
lobbying of arms makers and the desire of members of Congress to gen-
      erate jobs in their districts, pointed to the creation of just the kind of
garrison state he devoutly hoped to avoid and had alluded to so elo-
              quently inhis "Chance for Peace" speech to newspaper editors in early
1953. He did not want to see America's resources devoted so heavily to
defense that the rest of society withered. It was a prescient — and coura-
       geous— position for a president to take. It was also one of the reasons he
put such great emphasis on improving intelligence-gathering systems.
The more the country knew about the threats it faced, the more effi-
             ciently, and economically, it could plan for its defense.
   Killian, Land, and Purcell came to the White House that day to brief
Eisenhower about the latest spy technologies. Purcell briefly described
a new balloon-mounted acoustical system that could detect the sound of
Soviet missile launches. Land then briefed the president on the Corona
project, reporting that progress was being made on the camera system
but other aspects were not going as well, including the rockets and the
recovery capsule. Land said he expected photographs would show ob-
     jects on earth 20 to 50 feet in diameter. He assured Eisenhower that the
purpose of the project remained secret despite "uninformed" specula-
     tion in the press about reconnaissance satellites. Killian wound up the
meeting with a status report on exploratory design work for a new high-
performance spy plane that could someday replace the U-2. With su-
           personic speed and streamlined shape, the plane, in theory, would be
virtually invisible to radar.
   Not surprisingly, the most promising proposal for the new airplane
came from Kelly Johnson, who sometimes referred to the prospective
aircraft as the U-3. Even before the U-2 had taken to the skies over the
                        280         Secret      Empire


Soviet Union in the summer of 1956, Johnson had settled on the for-
       mula for his next spy plane. "We knew we needed more altitude and, es-
                pecially, more speed," he later recalled. How much more was hard to
believe. Johnson wanted to build a plane that would travel for thousands
of miles at more than three times the speed of sound — that is, faster than
a high-velocity rifle bullet — at an altitude in excess of 85,000 feet. Or to
put it another way, he was dreaming of an airplane that could outrace a
missile.

   Even by today's technological standards, that would be a tall order. By
the aviation yardsticks of the 1950s, it seemed utterly outlandish. As Ben
Rich, one of Johnson's colleagues, recalled, "Experimental rocket air-
       planes had flown at blinding Mach 3 speed using powerful thrusters for
two or three minutes at a time until fuel ran out. But Kelly was propos-
    ing an airplane to cruise at more than three times the speed of sound,
that could fly coast to coast in less than an hour on one tank of gas." The
U-2, by comparison, was child's play. "He was proposing to build an air-
       plane that would fly not only four times faster than the U-2 but five
miles higher — and the U-2 was then the current high-altitude cham-
     pion of the skies," Rich said.
  Land, in his role as the chairman of a panel that advised the CIA on
technology matters, had encouraged Johnson to pursue his ideas. John-
    son made the first entry in his log for the project, which he called
Archangel, on April 21, 1958. "I drew up the first Archangel proposal
for a Mach 3 cruise airplane having a 4,000 nautical mile range at 90,000
to 95,000 feet."
   Ben Rich described it this way: "It was designated A-l, and showed a
striking single-seat, two-engine airplane — a long, sleek bullet-shaped
fuselage with rounded inlets on big engines mounted on the tip of small
delta wings that were two thirds of the way back on the fuselage. One
look and even a schoolboy would realize this bird was designed for blaz-

    ing speed."
  In November 1958, Land and his panel members had met with
Eisenhower to review competing preliminary designs produced by
Lockheed and Convair. Land reported that it appeared possible to build
an airplane that would be difficult for the Russians to track and that
                           Heartbreak                 281


would be traveling so fast it would be all but impossible to intercept.
Eisenhower approved Land's recommendation to proceed with further
exploratory work and authorized Bissell to withdraw $6.5 million from
the CIA reserve fund to pay for the planning effort.
  None of this, of course, solved the immediate problem of determin-
    ing how many missiles the Kremlin had ready to fire at the United
States. Even at the lower range Symington had acidly cited, the CIA cal-
         culated that in the next few years the Kremlin would have a three-to-
one advantage in intercontinental missiles. If so, there would be a
dangerous imbalance in Soviet and American power.
   Eager to get as accurate a reading as possible, McElroy, his deputy,
Donald Quarles, and General Nathan Twining, who by this time was
serving as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, appealed to Eisenhower
on February 12, 1959, to resume U-2 flights, which had been suspended
since March 1, 1958. Following a meeting of the National Security
Council, the three men lingered behind at the White House to talk with
the president.
   Eisenhower had made it clear after the inaugural missions of the U-2
in July 1956, and the angry Soviet protest that followed, that any further
flights would require his direct approval, which was granted sparingly.
He wanted to review every flight plan himself. Bissell would come to the
White House armed with maps and the targets that he had picked with
the assistance of the Ad Hoc Requirements Committee. The Dulles
brothers would usually accompany him, Allen to vouch for the intelli-
       gence purposes and John Foster to pass judgment on the diplomatic im-
              plications. They were usually joined by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the secretary of defense or his deputy. Eisenhower would
study the plans and sometimes suggest target and route changes.
   "He would always get the map on his desk and look at it," Bissell re-
            called, "and always ask me to come around and explain this or that fea-
     ture ofit, and there were occasions, more than once, when he would say,
'Well, you can go there, but I want you to leave out that leg and go
straight that way. I want you to go from B to D because it looks to me
like you might be getting a little exposed over here,' or something of this
 kind."
                        282         Secret      Empire


   McElroy, Quarles, and Twining hadn't come to request a specific
flight, but rather to petition Eisenhower to reconsider his blanket resis-
        tance to using the plane on flights over the Soviet interior. The only
missions he had approved in the preceding twelve months were re-
         stricted toborder areas. Going inland, the three officials argued, was the
only way to gauge the size of the Soviet missile fleet. McElroy said the
lack of reliable information was so severe that he did not know the loca-
     tion of a single operational Soviet missile base. That could mean either
there were no launch bases, and the noisy Russian claims were hollow,
or there were plenty of missile sites and Washington simply had not
found them. The uncertainty was untenable.
   The Soviet launch sites at Kapustin Yar in the Ukraine and at Tyu-
ratam in Kazakhstan, which had been identified and photographed by
the U-2, were used to test missiles and weren't what bothered the de-
       fense secretary. He was concerned about bases from which operational
missiles would be launched against the United States, including a new
base under construction at Plesetsk, near the White Sea. McElroy was
also likely worried about mobile launchers that could be transported by
road or rail, making them difficult to track and count. Citing assurances
from the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the Russians still lacked the means to
shoot down a U-2, McElroy requested permission to start planning new
overflights. Twining seconded the recommendation.
   Eisenhower demurred. For one thing, he was worried about picking a
new fight with Khrushchev at a time when tensions were already run-
      ning very high over Berlin. Khrushchev had announced in November
that he would sign a peace treaty with East Germany in six months that
would erase Allied rights in West Berlin. If Khrushchev carried through
on the ultimatum, the world would face a new Berlin crisis. Given the
sensitivity of the city and the postwar agreements that placed West
Berlin under American, British, and French control, it was inconceiv-
     able that Eisenhower could let West Berlin fall into Communist hands.

As Eisenhower recalled in his memoirs, "Our nation would never agree
to the surrender of West Berlin either to the Soviets or to East Ger-

        many. ..."
  It was not a good time to risk an incident over the U-2. Underscoring
                          Heartbreak               283


the gravity with which he viewed use of the plane, he informed McElroy
and the others that nothing would compel him to go to Congress more
quickly to seek a declaration of war than similarly brazen violations of
American airspace by Soviet spy planes. Of the many comments Eisen-
        hower made about the U-2 during the four years the plane was used for
flights far into Soviet airspace, this one most clearly captures his fear
that the spy flights could ignite a war.
   Eisenhower also hoped that despite the initial Corona launch failure,
space-based reconnaissance might soon provide ample intelligence
about Russian missiles. He told his visitors that U-2 flights should be
"held to a minimum pending the availability of this new equipment."
Quarles warned Eisenhower that it might be another two years before
space photographs became available.
  The argument failed to sway the president, who believed Soviet mis-
   sile technology had not yet reached the point where the new weapons
could be mass-produced or fielded in large numbers. Eisenhower's as-
           sessment was remarkably close to the mark, though he wouldn't know
that until the first Corona pictures appeared eighteen months later. As
of early 1959, his view was more of a gut feeling than a reasoned analy-
    sis backed up by hard data. He said he based it on corresponding con-
              struction capability within the United States and the sense that the
government generally overestimated Soviet industrial and military
might. He reminded his visitors that the purported Soviet advantage in
long-range bombers had proven to be a mirage.
   Eisenhower's analysis may also have been based in part on knowledge
that the Russians had not launched any intercontinental missiles from
the base at Tyuratam since May 29, 1958. To CIA analysts, the long in-
       terval suggested problems in missile development, but Eisenhower
could not be sure about the cause of the delay or what it signified. In-
        deed, the Air Force argued that the inactivity meant the earlier test
flights had gone so well the Russians felt no need to continue them and
were already busy mass-producing missiles.
   On February 17, only five days after the discussion with McElroy,
Quarles, and Twining, launch activity resumed at Tyuratam. It was not
long before the Pentagon and CIA were back at the White House with a
                        284        Secret      Empire


new request to use the U-2. This time it was harder for Eisenhower to
resist.
   The resumption of Soviet missile tests eliminated the possibility that
the Kremlin program had hit a dead end. While testing probably meant
the Russians were still trying to perfect their missiles, it was clear work
was continuing, with the prospect that missiles would be deployed. On
April 6, upon hearing the case for additional spy flights, the president
reluctantly approved two missions that would venture deep into Soviet
airspace. But after sleeping on the decision, he invited McElroy and Bis-
sell to the Oval Office the next day to tell them he had changed his
mind. Andrew Goodpaster's notes about the conversation provide a re-
        vealing snapshot of Eisenhower's thinking — and agonizing.
   Eisenhower opened the discussion by summarizing his concerns.
"First, we now have the power to destroy the Soviets without need for
detailed targeting. Second, as the world is going now, there seems no
hope for the future unless we can make some progress in negotiations (it
is already four years since the Geneva meeting). Third, we cannot in the
present circumstances afford the revulsion of world opinion against the
United States that might occur — the U.S. being the only nation that
could conduct this activity. Fourth, we are putting several hundred mil-
     lion dollars into programs for more advanced capabilities."
   In summary, Goodpaster noted, "the President said he did not agree
that this project would be worth the political costs."
   Eisenhower told McElroy and Bissell he was well aware of the need
for hard information. He said, "This need is highlighted by the distor-
      tions several senators are making of our military position relative to that
of the Soviets, and they are helped in their 'demagoguery' by our uncer-
         tainties as to Soviet programs." But Eisenhower remained fearful of
"the terrible propaganda impact that would be occasioned if a recon-
          naissance plane were to fail."
   He was unwilling to give up all hope of negotiating a reduction in
tensions with Khrushchev, who seemed interested in scheduling a new
summit meeting. The President felt that "there is need to make some
kind of progress at the summit, even though we cannot be sure this is
                          Heartbreak                 285


possible." Eisenhower wound up his comments by advising the aides to
raise the matter with him again if circumstances changed.
   Goodpaster, circumspect about offering his own opinions in the
many memorandums he prepared for the president about sensitive is-
     sues, appended his own thoughts at the end of this memo. He, too, fa-
       vored new flights. "Earlier, the President had discussed this matter at
length with me. In response to his request for my advice, I analyzed the
proposal as to the importance of possible costs and possible gains, and
indicated I would be disposed to favor the two particular actions pro-
        posed. added
               I     that, while I had confidence in my analysis of the costs
and gains, I felt less sure of the evaluation of their relative importance
and would readily defer to the President's own assessment in this re-
spect."
  Eisenhower must have wondered how long he could hold the line
against U-2 flights when just seven days later the next Corona flight in-
             conveniently deposited a return capsule on the Soviet Union's doorstep.
Discoverer II, the third launch attempt, proceeded perfectly at first.
After a brief launch delay because of fog at Vandenberg, the two-stage
rocket blasted off at 1 : 1 8 p.m. on April 1 3 . The Thor and Agena engines
burned as planned, carrying the satellite into an elliptical polar orbit
that extended from 156 miles above the earth at its closest point to 243
miles at the most distant.

  The launch itself was a spectacular sight. "From their observation site
10,000 feet away," an Associated Press correspondent reported, "news-
      men saw the seventy-eight-foot projectile balancing gracefully on its tail
for fleeting seconds as the engine of the first-stage Thor missile, with a
thrust of 150,000 pounds, ignited in a cloud of white smoke.
   "Then with the roar of a dozen locomotives the rocket leaped up-
       ward, trailing a yellow plume of fire a hundred feet long. In less than
three minutes, it was out of sight, its path marked by a single white vapor
trail reaching miles into the blue sky."
   John Finney, covering the story for the Times from Washington, in-
         formed readers in a page-one story the next day that the United States
had placed a military satellite in orbit and hoped to recover it within a
                       286         Secret     Empire


day or two. "On the basis of preliminary tracking information from
radio stations in Hawaii and Alaska, the Air Force calculated that Dis-
         coverer IIhad gone into a near north-south orbit, as planned. With this
polar orbit, the satellite will pass over virtually all of the earth's surface."
   Though Finney did not know that the Discoverer program was actu-
     ally a spy satellite project, he came within an inch of the truth. His ac-
        count said, "In the rapidly growing technology of space, Discoverer II
represents an important first attempt to stabilize a satellite in space and
bring it back to earth. If successful, Discoverer II will be an important
advance in the development of military reconnaissance and scientific
satellites that can carry out their mission in space and then return with
their information."
   He also described the expected recovery operation. "The tentative
recovery plans call for returning a 160-pound cone-shaped capsule of
instruments from space over the Pacific Ocean. The capsule, dangling
from a parachute, would be caught in mid-air by Air Force cargo planes
equipped with hooks to snag the parachute."
   The plan didn't work. Because of an error in resetting the timer that
initiated the recovery sequence, the return capsule separated from the
Agena prematurely during the satellite's seventeenth orbit. Instead of
descending over the Pacific and coming into view not far from Hawaii,
the capsule came down somewhere near Norway. "It was a bad night,"
recalled Frank Buzard. "We knew we couldn't get ahold of it but we
tried to see if any other tracking stations could get to it. They couldn't.
We figured it was going to Spitsbergen."
   Spitzbergen Island is located in the Arctic Ocean, above the northern
tip of Norway. Residents of Longyearbyen, a mining community on the
island, reported seeing a "starburst" and a descending parachute.
   The Pentagon, not eager to draw attention to the embarrassing
mistake, blandly announced that it was abandoning the recovery effort,
informing Finney and other reporters that it did not know if the separa-
     tion of the capsule from the satellite had taken place. Finney reported
the possibility that if the timing of the separation was off, the capsule
might land somewhere in the Arctic region.
                         Heartbreak               287


   Though the return capsule contained no photographic equipment —
the contents included several mechanical mice — the CIA and Pentagon
feared the Russians, who operated several coal mines on Spitzbergen,
would find it and deduce from the equipment that Washington was
working on a project to take pictures from space and send the film back
to earth. An American team was quickly dispatched to Norway to try to
find the capsule in Spitzbergen's snow-covered countryside. Word of
the search made it into the news on April 17.
   The group was led by Lt. Col. Charles Mathison of the Air Force, a
large, amiable man with a booming voice who was known among his
colleagues as "Moose." He was vice commander of the 6594th Test
Wing, which operated the ground control installations for Air Force
satellite programs. He was not cleared to know about Corona, so he flew
off to Norway unaware that his quarry was actually the capsule for a spy
satellite. With the help of the Norwegian military, Mathison conducted
an air and ground search, hoping to spot the gold capsule or the orange
and silver parachute that had brought it down to earth. The search
ended without success on April 22, but Mathison and his colleagues sus-
       pected that tracks they had seen around the likely landing site were evi-
       dence that the Russians had recovered the capsule. "There were reports
from the local people that they had seen this gold ball hanging on the
end of this particularly colored parachute that we had, and they noticed
that there had been an ice breaker going into Spitzbergen," Plummer
recalled. "Most of us were pretty convinced that the Russians got it."
   General Twining informed Quarles about Ma thison's investigation in
a memo on April 25. "From concentric circular tracks found in the snow
at the suspected impact point and leading to one of the Soviet mining
concessions on the island, we strongly suspect that the Soviets are in
possession of the capsule." It's little wonder that the mystery inspired
Alistair MacLean to write Ice Station Zebra, a popular technothriller that
involves an American submarine racing the Russians to a remote British
weather outpost near the polar ice cap to recover top secret satellite
photography. The book was published in 1963 and made into a movie in
1968.
                       288         Secret      Empire


  The next two launches, on June 3 and June 25, were even more dis-
          couraging because the satellites did not reach orbit. In both cases, the
Agena engine shut off before powering the payload to orbital velocity.
  The June 3 flight, Discoverer III, carried four mice, selected from a
sturdy breed maintained at the Air Force Aero Medical Field Labora-
      tory at Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico. In a sign of how little
scientists knew about space travel at this point, they selected black mice
to test whether cosmic rays would bleach their hair. As astronauts later
discovered, cosmic rays did not produce a change in hair color.
   The furry passengers were "seven to ten weeks old and weighed
slightly over one ounce each," according to CIA records. "A three-day
food supply was provided which consisted of a special formula contain-
     ing peanuts, oatmeal, gelatin, orange juice and water. Each mouse was
placed in a small individual cage about twice its size, and each had a
miniscule radio strapped to its back to monitor the effects of the space
trip on heart action, respiration and muscular activity."
   Because the flight was genuinely a biomedical test, the Air Force was
more than happy to tell the world about the mice. That was fine until
the rocket dived into the ocean, killing the creatures. Animal rights
groups, already exercised over the death of a monkey that had flown into
space aboard one of Wernher von Braun's Jupiter rockets in late May,
complained about the cavalier treatment of the animals. The British So-
      ciety Against Cruel Sports filed a formal protest with the American am-
             bassador inLondon, demanding that the United States send no more
monkeys or mice into space until it was confident they would survive
and be recovered. The furor forced the Corona managers to drop their
plans to send a second batch of mice aloft on the next flight.
   That opened the way to try the first launch of the Corona camera sys-
     tem in Discoverer IV on June 25. Like the previous flight, the Agena
rocket and satellite failed to achieve orbit and fell into the sea. After five
attempts, counting the ullage rocket misfiring in January, Bissell and
Plummer could point to just one launch that had achieved orbit, and
that mission had ended in disappointment at Spitzbergen. All in all, it
was not a promising start. It looked as if the objectives might simply be
unattainable with the available technology.
                          Heartbreak                289


  The setbacks were especially disheartening to Bissell, who had been
spoiled by the swift: development of the U-2. "Malfunctions in an exper-
         imental satellite system," he recalled, "are exceptionally frustrating to
the designers and operators because there is never any human observer
to see and evaluate what went wrong. If something failed on a U-2 test
flight, unless it was a fatal crash, the pilot could come back and relate
what happened. This was not the case with satellites. They spun out of
control, burned up in the atmosphere, crashed, hopelessly lost, in the
ocean, or exploded. Because the whole system was destroyed on reentry,
it was often impossible to retrieve it and do an assessment. One relied on
telemetry while the satellite was still in flight — sometimes it was possi-
    ble to infer from the telemetry what went wrong; quite often it was dif-
           ficult. You would simply have to try again and hope for the best. As
failures continued to mount, I found the experience increasingly heart-
           breaking and frustrating. We were all aware that every one of these
flights was hideously expensive. It took a certain amount of fortitude to
keep going and going, hoping it would finally work."
   It's doubtful that such a troubled program would survive for long in
Washington today. The tolerance for failure is much lower on expensive
technological projects these days, in part because they can become the
victim of partisan politics as one party condemns the other for wasting
money or blindly pursuing unworkable ideas. Repeated failures, chron-
     icled bythe media, can quickly undermine public and congressional
support. It is also much harder now to maintain the secrecy of an ambi-
      tious military or intelligence enterprise like Corona. After just a few
months of miscues, there would be tremendous pressure to cancel a
project that seemed as futile as Corona did in 1959 and the first half of
1960.

   Bissell, backed by Eisenhower, was determined not to give up. "The
crying need to understand what was happening in the Soviet Union
drove this program and gave tolerance to the risk," recalled John
McMahon, who worked as a senior aid to Bissell.
  Whatever irritation Eisenhower may have felt about the delays, he
remained faithful to the concept, according to Goodpaster. "Eisen-
      hower always said, 'Let's not worry about it. Let's stay with it. It's so im-
                        290         Secret     Empire


portant, and we need it. We need to just keeping going with it.' " The
willingness to proceed with high-risk concepts in the face of adversity
was typical of Eisenhower, Goodpaster said. "This is the man who de-
      cided inthe bad weather to go ahead with the invasion of Europe."
   Plummer, Lockheed's program manager for Corona, was impressed
by Bissell's persistence and his refusal to panic in the face of repeated
disappointments. After each failure, Bissell and General Ritland,
Bissell's deputy, would listen to the reports from Plummer and his col-
          leagues and then calmly instruct them to try again. "I suspect he learned
that from working with Kelly Johnson," Plummer said. "We would
present a technical problem — we might have just lost a missile — and we
would tell him why we thought we could do better the next time. ... If
they were satisfied, they'd say okay, let's go, let's proceed to the next
launch."
   Bissell's recollection of the delays was not quite as benign. "There
would be a long stand-down after each attempt to enable some modifi-
         cation in the equipment to be made. This would be followed by the
wretched business of another flight that still didn't work. Once we cured
a particular malfunction, a new malfunction would occur and the whole
guessing game would begin again: what went wrong and what can be
done to fix it."
   Eisenhower gave Bissell the money and time he needed to sustain a
busy launch schedule at Vandenberg. But at the same time, hedging his
bet on Corona and once again following the advice of Killian and Land,
he continued to support plans to build a sleek new spy plane to succeed
the U-2. Lastly, and with the greatest reluctance, he gave the go-ahead
in July for another U-2 flight.
   The Russians left him little choice. The resumption of Soviet missile
launches at Tyuratam in February had marked the beginning of an ex-
        tensive new phase of test flights. As spring gave way to summer in 1959,
with Corona showing no signs of coming on line anytime soon, just
about all of Eisenhower's top national security advisers leaned on him to
authorize another U-2 flight over the Soviet heartland.
   Allen Dulles and Bissell visited the White House on the morning of
July 7 to go over plans. They urged the president to let them proceed
                        Heartbreak               291


with a flight over Tyuratam that would originate in Pakistan and end at
an abandoned World War II airfield in a remote area of Iran that two of
BisselPs top aides, Col. Stanley Beerli and John Parangosky, had spotted
while hunting for new landing sites in the region. The shah of Iran, Mo-
          hammad Reza Pahlavi, who had been installed with the help of the CIA
in 1953, was more than happy to cooperate. The only problem with the
landing strip was that the countryside around it was controlled by ban-
dits.
  Eisenhower wanted to hear from Christian Herter, who had become
secretary of state in April after John Foster Dulles resigned in ill health.
On July 8, Herter, Bissell, Goodpaster, and Allen Dulles assembled in
the Oval Office. Eisenhower, according to Goodpaster's account of the
meeting, reiterated his concerns about using the U-2, telling his aides
he worried about "the possibility of getting involved in something
costly and harmful."
   Herter, whose recommendation was likely to be decisive, advised
Eisenhower to approve the flight. He said the intelligence objective was
paramount and that the chances of losing the plane seemed remote. Bis-
    sell was not quite as confident. He said the newest Russian fighter jets
could probably come close to the altitude of the U-2. The risk, however,
was still considered relatively limited because the Soviet planes could
not fly at that height for long or maneuver effectively in the thin air. If
the Russians spotted and protested the flight, the men agreed, Washing-
     ton could defend itself "with an absolute disavowal and denial on the
matter."
   Eisenhower seemed torn. He was well aware that Khrushchev hoped
to travel to the United States at the end of the summer, the first visit to
America by a Soviet leader. Whether the trip might help reduce ten-
      sions wasn't clear, but there was little doubt that another U-2 flight
could be disruptive.
   "The President said that Khrushchev seems almost to be looking for
excuses to be belligerent," Goodpaster noted. "By doing nothing he can
put us in a terrible hole in Berlin. Holding the cards he does, he could
very readily say that such an event as this marks the end of serious nego-
         tiations. There remains in the President's mind the question whether
                        292        Secret      Empire


we are getting to the point where we must decide if we are trying to pre-
     pare to fight a war, or to prevent one."
   Goodpaster didn't record which of these options he thought Eisen-
           hower was choosing, but it seems probable that in approving the flight,
the president was hoping to help prevent a war. Goodpaster simply
noted, "After all the discussion, the President indicated that in view of
the unanimous recommendation of the officials having the operational
authority, he would assent to the operation being conducted."
   On July 9, 1959, more than sixteen months after the last flight deep
into Soviet airspace, a U-2 took off from the secret U-2 base at
Peshawar in northwest Pakistan on a mission code-named Operation
Touchdown. The CIA had secretly arranged with the Pakistani govern-
       ment to make use of an airfield there to take advantage of limited Soviet
radar coverage along the Central Asian frontier north of the Himalayan
Mountains. Bissell wanted whatever element of surprise he could still
get, knowing that interception was less likely if the plane could slip into
Soviet airspace undetected.
   Col. Beerli, the commander of Detachment B, which was stationed at
Incirlik, an American air base near Adana, Turkey, had developed a
rapid deployment system to move U-2s in and out of Pakistan as quickly
and surreptitiously as possible. Under the cover of darkness, all the sup-
      plies and gear needed to launch a mission, including 50-gallon barrels of
the special U-2 fuel, would be loaded aboard two C-130 transport
planes and flown from Incirlik to Peshawar. A few hours later, one of the
Agency's U-2 pilots would bring one of the spy planes in from Turkey.
After the aircraft was refueled, a fresh pilot who had flown in with the
supplies and done the necessary prebreathing of oxygen, would take off
before dawn for the Soviet Union.
   In this case, Mission 4125, Martin Knutson was the operational pilot.
After crossing into Soviet territory, he guided the plane over a number
of military sites, including the nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk and the
missile base at Tyuratam. He then headed east, toward the Ural Moun-
      tains and on to the airstrip in Zahedan, Iran. To secure the landing strip,
the CIA had dispatched armed agents to await Knutson 's arrival. "If I
                         Heartbreak               293


made it across the border and saw a cloud of black smoke, it meant that
the field was being attacked by the bandits. If that happened, I was sup-
        posed to eject and bail out. I crossed the Russian border with only 100
gallons of fuel remaining. Really getting hairy. I didn't see any smoke, so
I came in and landed with less than 20 gallons left in the tank."
   The skies over the targets were clear, and the photographs were su-
      perb. They showed that the base at Tyuratam was being expanded with
the addition of a second launch pad.
   As good as the photos were, they didn't resolve whether or not there
was a missile gap. With Khrushchev's visit approaching, Eisenhower
was unwilling to entertain proposals for further flights during the sum-
      mer. He later extended the ban through the end of the year, believing
that his talks with the Soviet leader in Washington and at Camp David
in mid-September had eased tensions somewhat. During the discus-
      sions, Khrushchev backed off of his threat to sign a peace treaty with
East Germany and Eisenhower accepted an invitation to visit the Soviet
Union the following spring. The two leaders also agreed to convene a
four-power summit meeting with their British and French counter-
      parts. Khrushchev surprised Eisenhower during their talks by never
mentioning the U-2 flights, perhaps because he was embarrassed that
Soviet military forces could not prevent the flagrant violations of Rus-
     sian airspace. As Khrushchev barnstormed around the United States,
visiting a movie studio in Los Angeles, touring a family farm in Iowa,
and sightseeing in New York, the cold war momentarily seemed less
threatening.
   That didn't stop Khrushchev from continuing to boast about his
rockets. In November he told a group of Soviet journalists, "Now we
have such a stock of rockets, such an amount of atomic and hydrogen
weapons, that if they attack us, we could wipe our potential enemies off
the face of the earth. ..." He added, "By the way, I shall reveal — and let
the people know about it; I am making no secret of this — that in one
year, 250 hydrogen warheads came off the assembly line in the factory
we visited." By the end of the year, the Russians had also succeeded in
sending two spacecraft to the moon, Luna I and II, both lifted into space
                       294        Secret      Empire


by the same SS-6 rockets that could deliver nuclear warheads to targets
in the United States. Washington was still struggling to get its rockets
into orbit.
   With BisselPs secret air force grounded for the time being, Eisen-
        hower looked to Corona for answers about the missile gap. He got none.
   The project was still beset with problems. Summer and fall had
brought more disappointments. An August launch, Discoverer V,
yielded no photographs after the camera broke down during the first
orbit, apparently because of the cold, and the recovery capsule was fired
farther out into space rather than back toward earth when its spin stabi-
         lization rockets misfired. Later that month, Discoverer VI made it into
orbit, but the camera failed on the second orbit and the retrorocket did
not work properly. Two November missions, Discoverer VII and VIII,
were no more successful.
  Walter Levison, who was directing work on the camera at Itek, was so
discouraged that he drove up to Edwin Land's country home in Peter-
          borough, New Hampshire, the weekend before Thanksgiving to say he
didn't think a camera system could be perfected. Victor K. McElheny,
Land's biographer, described the encounter: "For Levison, it was the
bleakest moment of his life. He told Land, the head of the small outside
committee superintending Corona, that he should carry word of
Corona's failure to President Eisenhower. The project would have to
'stand down.' Levison felt frustrated and humiliated. Land, however,
took another tack, calling for redoubled effort over three months to res-
     cue the project."
   As a CIA history of Corona bluntly noted, "It had become plain by
the end of November 1959 that many things had to be done to correct
the multiple failures that were plaguing the Corona system. Eight
Thor-Agena combinations and five cameras had been expended with
nothing to show for the effort except accumulated knowledge of the
system's weaknesses. The project technicians knew what was going
wrong but not always why."
   The technicians were hampered by the weight limit of the satellite,
which prevented the installation of diagnostic equipment to monitor
what was going wrong with the propulsion and guidance systems and
                         Heartbreak              295


the reconnaissance package. "This meant that the engineers usually did
not have enough diagnostic data to correct the problems with confi-
         dence," Bud Wheelon said. "What is remarkable is that Bissell and Rit-
land pressed on despite these failures, and that Eisenhower continued to

support them."
   The list of failures grew so long that serious consideration was given
to scrapping the whole enterprise. The fact that Eisenhower stayed with
the project through twelve failed launches over twenty months is evi-
       dence ofboth his perseverance and his desperation to replace the U-2.
   Nearly every Corona component contributed to the dismal record at
one time or another. The Thor and Agena engines would burn too long,
flinging the satellite too far into space to be of any use. At other times,
the rocket engines would cut out prematurely, leaving the satellite short
of orbit and on a trajectory to crash into the sea. When the Agena vehi-
    cle was placed in the correct orbit, the stabilization system would fail,
making picture taking impossible as the satellite tumbled through space.
There were all sorts of electrical and mechanical problems. On the rare
occasions when all the rocket and guidance equipment worked per-
        fectly, the camera malfunctioned or the return capsule went off course
during separation and sailed off toward the stars instead of falling back
to earth. Before Kodak solved the acetate problem, the film simply
crumbled into dust in the vacuum of space.
   Bissell and General Ritland periodically suspended launch operations
to give Plummer and his subcontractors a chance to evaluate and fix the
problems. More preflight testing was instituted in hopes of catching de-
      sign and engineering mistakes before they crippled another flight. All
this cost time and money. Bissell seemed acutely aware of the unusual
circumstances in January 1960 when he appealed to General Cabell,
Allen Dulles's deputy, for additional funds. "Although such a sequence is
regrettable," Bissell said, "there has been considerable confusion in this
program as to what the amount of the overruns would be, and this has
made it difficult to obtain approvals in an orderly fashion in advance."
  Even the launch moratoriums failed to assure success. One of the
most dramatic, and disheartening, failures occurred on February 19,
1960, just two weeks after the end of a three-month break. The mission
                           296         Secret       Empire


was Discoverer X. Moments after liftoff, the Thor booster began to
fishtail and wheeled northeast toward the towns of Santa Maria and San
Luis Obispo. A technician sent a signal to the Thor to self-destruct.
Fifty-two seconds into flight, the rocket blew up over Vandenberg. As
pieces of the satellite, including the camera system, fell to the ground,
security officers rushed to the crash site to shield the reconnaissance
equipment. This was not exactly the way engineers had imagined the
film would be recovered from the satellite.
   While Bissell and Plummer wrestled with the uncooperative satellite,
the administration was fueling the missile gap debate with a new set of
numbers. In Senate appearances in January 1960, Allen Dulles, Thomas
S. Gates, the new secretary of defense, and General Twining each pro-
        duced different estimates for the number of Soviet missiles. The dis-
         crepancy— the CIA was at the low end, the Joint Chiefs at the high
end — ignited a new round of catcalls from Johnson, Symington, Henry
M. "Scoop" Jackson, and other Democrats. After Dulles was summoned
to the Capitol again to dispel the confusion, Symington gravely an-
         nounced that the CIA chief had "completely verified the fact that there
had been no elimination of the ballistic missile gap or reduction in the
three-to-one ratio against the United States."
   Dulles was angered by the conflict. As far as he could tell from the ev-
        idence collected by the CIA, including the U-2 flights that Eisenhower
had permitted, the Kremlin appeared to have fielded very few intercon-
           tinental missiles. In September the Agency had reported in a major
study of Soviet missiles that "we believe it is now well established that
the USSR is not engaged in a 'crash' program for ICBM development."
The assessment, echoing the figures that Dulles had given to the Armed
Services Committee in January 1959, estimated that just a handful of in-
                     tercontinental missiles — around ten — might already be operational or
nearly so. By that standard, the Air Force estimate of one hundred Rus-
     sian missiles seemed wildly overblown, and inspired primarily by a de-
     sire to stampede Congress into fattening the Air Force budget. But
because the U-2 flights were so secret, Dulles couldn't cite the photo-
        graphic evidence in his Senate testimony.
   Maintaining the secrecy of the U-2 was increasingly difficult by this
                          Heartbreak               297


time. With photographs from the overflights circulating at the Penta-
       gon, White House, CIA, and other agencies, word had long since
seeped through the capital that the government was conducting spy
flights over Soviet territory. A number of journalists had learned about
the plane. Hanson Baldwin, the military correspondent of the New York
Times, had seen a U-2 at a German airfield and discovered its true pur-
      pose. When he informed the CIA in the summer of 1958 that he was
preparing a story, Allen Dulles appealed to the publisher of the Times,
Arthur Hays Sulzberger, to hold off publication. He agreed. Other pub-
          lications, including the Washington Post and the Cleveland Plain Dealer,
also knew about the plane but did not run stories.
   As long as U-2 operations remained officially secret, Dulles knew he
could not overtly use the photographs to shape the public debate about
the missile gap, but with additional flights he could at least hope to still
the intense arguments within the government. "As a result of these
[January 1960] Senate hearings," the CIA history of the U-2 program
reported, "Dulles was determined to obtain permission for more over-
       flights inorder to settle the missile-gap question once and for all and
end the debate within the intelligence community."
   With the support of the President's Board of Consultants on Foreign
Intelligence Activities, including Gen. James Doolittle, the legendary
World War II aviator, Dulles pressed Eisenhower to expand the use of
the U-2. The board gathered at the White House on February 2 and
urged Eisenhower to make use of the spy plane "to the maximum degree
possible." When General John E. Hull reminded the president that
Washington remained blind to Soviet military preparations, Eisen-
         hower's thoughts turned once again to the possibility of another summit
meeting and his standing in the free world. It looked increasingly likely
that his next meeting with Khrushchev would come in Paris in May.
   "The President said that he has one tremendous asset in a summit
meeting," Goodpaster noted. "That is his reputation for honesty. If one
of these aircraft were lost when we are engaged in apparently sincere de-
            liberation, could
                        it    be put on display in Moscow and ruin the President's
effectiveness."
   How right he was.
                    CHAPTER           FOURTEEN




               "Capsule Recovered
                       Undamaged"

From the time Kelly Johnson started designing the U-2 in late
     1953, everyone involved knew the Russians would sooner or later
figure out how to shoot it down. Jack Carter, the Lockheed executive
who first encouraged Johnson to produce a high-altitude spy plane, had
estimated in 1953 that the plane would elude Russian air defenses until
1960. But in early 1960, as the Pentagon and CIA determined there was
a clear and present danger to the aircraft, the Eisenhower administra-
     tion failed to heed the new warnings.
  Richard Bissell knew the U-2 was becoming increasingly vulnerable.
On March 14, 1960, the Air Technical Intelligence Center (ATIC), an
Air Force agency, put Bissell on notice that the latest Soviet surface-to-
air missile (SAM), the SA-2 Guideline, could intercept the U-2. The
center reported: "The greatest threat to the U-2 is the Soviet SAM. Al-
        though the ATIC analysis concedes a remote possibility that the SAM
may be less effective than estimated, their present evaluation is the SAM
(Guideline) has a high probability of successful intercept at 70,000 feet
providing that detection is made in sufficient time to alert the site."
   These bell-ringing findings should have ended the overflights on the
spot. They were presented to Bissell by one of his top aides, Col.
William Burke, the acting head of the Development Projects Division,
the CIA office responsible for managing the U-2, the Corona project,
and the development of a supersonic spy plane. The office had asked the
Air Force to conduct the study of Soviet air defenses, so it wasn't as if the
                                    298
         "Capsule      Recovered         Undamaged"               299


report arrived unexpectedly or was filed away without reaching the at-
        tention ofsenior officials.
  At the end of March, the CIA produced a National Intelligence Esti-
      mate on the range and accuracy of Soviet surface-to-air missiles. It
echoed the Air Force report. In a 1967 interview, Bissell recalled that
"the intelligence estimate of the capability of the Russian surface-to-air
missile conceded that the missile did have the altitude to reach the U-2."
   As these reports were landing on BisselPs desk, and the administration
was beginning to make plans for a May summit meeting in Paris, Bissell
was already preparing for another set of U-2 flights over the Soviet
Union. The decision to renew operations dated back to mid-February.
After considering the appeal of Dulles, Bissell, and General Doolittle,
Eisenhower had reviewed four proposed U-2 operations. Following an-
       other nudge from Dulles in early March, he approved one flight, stipu-
        lating that it be completed by the end of the month. Because it took
longer than expected to get Pakistani permission to use an airfield at
Peshawar to launch the flight, Bissell asked the White House to extend
the deadline. On March 28, Eisenhower agreed. He pushed the time line
to April 10, and at the same time approved BisselPs request to conduct a
second flight, provided it could be done by April 19. Because of bad
weather and other complications, that deadline would slip to May 1 .
   The first flight took place on April 9. It should have eliminated any
lingering doubts about Soviet defenses. The mission, called Operation
Square Deal, took the pilot, Bob Ericson, over three sensitive military
installations — the nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk, the missile test
base at Tyuratam, and the missile test range and radar complex at Sary
Shagan.
  Expectations that the U-2 could slip undetected into Soviet airspace
from the south by flying out of Peshawar and crossing Afghanistan
proved false. Electronic equipment aboard the plane showed the Rus-
     sians picked up the aircraft shortly after Ericson crossed the Soviet bor-
     der. He was pursued during the six-hour flight by a variety of Soviet jet
fighters, some equipped with air-to-air missiles, but none were able to
get within shooting range of the U-2. Aware of Soviet aeronautical ad-
            vances, Kelly Johnson in 1959 had started equipping a new generation
                       300        Secret     Empire


of U-2s — known as the U-2C — with a more powerful engine, the Pratt
& Whitney J7 5 -PI 3. Ericson was at the controls of one of these new
models. The engine, though heavier than the earlier Pratt & Whitney
J57 power plant, allowed the U-2 to climb more quickly, reducing the
period when contrails were likely to be produced, and provided a higher
cruising altitude of 74,600 feet. The extra margin of safety may have
helped Ericson elude the Soviet fighters, but the far more important
factor was Soviet incompetence. By the time Soviet pilots were cleared
to pursue the intruder, the U-2 in most cases was already out of range as
the Soviet fighter jets scrambled into the air.
   Still, if the Russians could track the plane throughout the flight, and
they had new missiles that could shoot it down, the obvious lesson of the
Ericson mission was that it should be the last. Khrushchev didn't miss
the implications. He was furious at his air defense commanders for
squandering the opportunity. He knew that if they reacted faster the
next time, the American plane could be shot down. Referring to the
Ericson flight, Khrushchev later said, "We'd had an opportunity to
shoot down a U-2, but our antiaircraft batteries were caught napping
and didn't open fire soon enough."
   Bissell somehow didn't get the point. In its examination of the Eric-
     son flight, the CIA history of the U-2 noted, "Although the Soviets
failed to intercept the U-2, their success at tracking it should have
served as a warning against future overflights from [Peshawar] (or any-
       where else, for that matter). . . . Unfortunately, neither [deleted] nor
Richard Bissell took the logical step of recommending the cessation of
overflights now that the risks had increased substantially."
   The White House also managed to draw the wrong conclusions.
The absence of a strong protest seemed to persuade Eisenhower that
the Russians had decided to live with the flights. George Kistiakowsky,
the Harvard chemist who had replaced James Killian as the president's
science adviser in the spring of 1 959, later wondered whether the Krem-
    lin had refrained from protesting the Ericson flight in hopes of luring
Washington into another mission, one that the Russians might shoot
down. The silence, he noted in his diary on May 16, 1960, was "virtually
inviting us to repeat the sortie."
         "Capsule Recovered Undamaged"                            301

  Bissell was clearly haunted in subsequent years by his failure to
appreciate the import of the April 9 flight. He reflected on the case in his
memoirs: "Even though all efforts to intercept the plane failed, the
incident should have served as a warning. Had we given it more atten-
      tion, we might have decided to suspend future overflights. Instead, we
relied on a national intelligence estimate that concluded that although a
surface-to-air missile could indeed reach the U-2's flying altitude, it was
optimized for 60,000 feet. Above 60,000 feet its accuracy would fall off
very rapidly because there wouldn't be air dense enough for its control
surfaces to bite on. The Russians could get a missile up, but they
couldn't control it or bring it in for a kill, or so we believed."
   His recollection conveniently fails to mention the more ominous and
specific warning provided by the Air Force on March 14. As Bissell im-
       plies, though, the main problem may have been his own inattention. In
March and April of 1960, he was hip-deep in Corona problems. He was
also distracted by a variety of covert operations that would soon spiral
into some of the CIA's most notorious mistakes, and he was overseeing
development of the supersonic spy plane to succeed the U-2. Managing
any one of these portfolios would have been trying enough; attempting
to direct all of them was foolhardy, even for someone as smart and nim-
    ble as Bissell. All of them suffered as a result, most immediately the han-
      dling ofthe U-2.
  As Ericson was winging his way across the Soviet Union on April 9,
preparations for the next Corona launch were accelerating. The last two
launch attempts, in February, had been profoundly discouraging. De-
      spite a three-month launch moratorium and intense evaluation of all
systems, Discover IX and Discover X had not even reached orbit. The
problems would have been vexing enough in a civilian technology proj-
    ect, but the pressures bearing down on Corona were extreme because of
the national security exigencies. After ten expensive failures, Bissell and
his team had yet to solve some of the most basic technological chal-
        lenges. They still couldn't count on the two-stage Thor-Agena rocket to
reliably propel the satellite into orbit. The camera repeatedly malfunc-
         tioned. The recovery vehicle regularly veered off course.
   On April 15, Bissell and Jim Plummer were ready for another Corona
                       302        Secret      Empire


attempt. This time the Thor and Agena rockets powered the satellite
into orbit. The mission was publicly identified as Discoverer XI.
Though less than half the normal load of film was stowed on board to
leave room for equipment that could monitor various mechanical sys-
       tems, all the film was exposed and safely stored in the recovery capsule
for the descent to earth. This alone was a triumph, since it was the first
time that the film and camera system had performed as planned. The
main reason was that Kodak had finally started shipping the new Mylar-
based film called Estar, which could withstand the vacuum conditions in
space. But the good luck ended as the recovery capsule separated from
the Agena. The small rockets used to spin the vehicle into position for
its return to earth once again misfired and the capsule was lost in space.
It was another painful disappointment.
   With both the U-2 and Corona at critical junctures that required his
undivided attention in mid-April, Bissell was also quarterbacking an as-
         sortment ofclandestine operations designed to destabilize or topple un-
         friendly foreign governments. As the CIA's deputy director for plans,
the job Dulles had awarded him at the beginning of 1959, Bissell ran the
Agency's worldwide spy operations. This espionage empire included
spy stations abroad, dozens of covert programs, and a tidy reserve fund
worth more than $ 1 00 million that he and Dulles could dispense free of
the government's usual bookkeeping requirements. The Agency was
surreptitiously intervening, or soon would be, in the internal affairs of a
host of troublespots, including Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Tibet,
Laos, and the Congo. The rules were dangerously loose, giving Bissell
the freedom to cook up all manner of madcap plots, including schemes
to poison foreign leaders. With the White House's encouragement, the
prime target in the spring of 1960 was Fidel Castro, who had seized
power in Cuba a year earlier and established a Communist dictatorship
on the island.
   Drawing on his familiarity with the CIA-engineered coup in
Guatemala in 1954, which he helped put together, Bissell had presented
a similar destabilization plan for Cuba to Eisenhower on March 17. The
president approved the proposal, which was labeled "A Program of
Covert Action Against the Castro Regime." This scheme would eventu-
         "Capsule       Recovered         Undamaged"                303

ally mutate into the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and a loony plot
to disable or kill Castro with an exploding cigar, as well as a variety of
other inane assassination ideas. Before the end of March, Bissell quietly
traveled to Athens to see if James Critchfield, one of the Agency's top
operatives, was willing to run the Cuba operation. Critchfield declined.
  In hindsight, it seems clear Bissell was juggling too many responsibil-
     ities. At just the moment when he should have advised Eisenhower to
terminate the U-2 flights, Bissell instead asked the president to extend
the deadline for the second April mission to May 1 . Andrew Goodpaster
recorded the fateful decision in a memorandum on April 25. "After
checking with the President, I informed Mr. Bissell that one additional
operation may be undertaken, provided it is carried out prior to May 1 .
No operation is to be carried out after May 1 ."
   Though Eisenhower was ultimately responsible for sending Francis
Gary Powers into Soviet airspace at an inopportune time, he was acting
on BisselPs advice and may well have lacked a full understanding of the
growing Soviet threat when he told Goodpaster to extend the deadline
to May 1 . Eisenhower thought there was little chance that the plane and
pilot would survive a successful attack, which gave him a false sense of
confidence. In his White House memoirs, he recalled that the CIA and

Joint Chiefs had insisted that the plane would "virtually disintegrate,"
meaning the Russians would be left with little definitive evidence that
the United States was invading its airspace.
   If that was his understanding, no one had bothered to inform him
that the film was almost sure to survive almost any calamity and would
certainly give away the nature and provenance of the overflight. In de-
         scribing these matters in his own memoirs, Bissell left unclear just how
much the president was told about all this:
    "By the beginning of 1960 there were signs that the Russians had
made considerable improvements in their air defense system. The pos-
         sibility oflosing a U-2 received serious consideration in policy circles.
We told Eisenhower that it was most unlikely that a pilot would survive
if shot down, by which we meant that a pilot would not survive a direct
hit, because the U-2 was a very light aircraft, more like a glider, and
would disintegrate on impact. We believed that if a U-2 was shot down
                         304         Secret      Empire


over Soviet territory, all the Russians would have was the wreckage of an
aircraft. We did not give sufficient weight to the possibility that a near
miss might incapacitate the aircraft but leave the pilot uninjured and
able to bail out.

   "There was unanimous agreement that the big rolls of film aboard
the plane would not be destroyed, even if the plane was hit. They were
virtually indestructible. Their nonflammable base would prevent them
from burning, and they could be dropped from a height often miles and
survive. We always knew that in the event of a crash there was going to
be a couple of rolls of film lying around, and there was not much we
could do about it."
   When asked in 1999 whether Eisenhower was aware of the Air Force
warning and other information about the acute nature of the Soviet
threat before he authorized Powers's flight, Goodpaster said, "I don't
think so. Not in a specific way. We had the general view that over time
the risks were going to become greater and greater, and they would fi-
      nally gain the capability of shooting it down. But I think I would re-
             member ifwe had had that kind of notice during the discussion in the
president's office, and I don't remember such a thing. I can't positively
say that it didn't happen, but I can be very close to positive."
   Bissell, in his memoirs, seems to pin primary responsibility for the
miscalculation on Eisenhower. After citing the Goodpaster memo of
April 25 to disprove any suggestion that the CIA had dispatched the
plane without presidential approval, Bissell points directly to Eisen-
        hower. "It looks to have been a grave mistake to have given us the general
authority to fly so close to the summit, but the decision was an explicit
one on Eisenhower's part. All of us, including the president, had become
a little too confident about the success of the U-2. 1 am sure that Eisen-
              hower's decision to grant us the week's extension was greatly influenced
by the fact that the Soviets had been unable to shoot our plane down ear-
     lier in the month. They had seen a lot of planes by now, he probably
thought, and to send one off a week before the summit wasn't going to be
any worse than two weeks before, which he'd already agreed to."
   Considering how cautious Eisenhower had been about using the
U-2, it is hard to believe that he would have approved the Powers mis-
        "Capsule      Recovered        Undamaged"              305

sion had he been fully informed about the close tracking of the Ericson
flight and the Air Force's dire assessment of the range and accuracy of
the Soviet Guideline missiles. No one seems to have told him that a red
line had been crossed and that the probability of a successful Soviet
attack on the plane had been established and was now an immediate
danger. With the summit conference in Paris rapidly approaching,
Eisenhower would likely have been especially sensitive to the possibility
of a diplomatic furor if one of the planes was shot down. He had warned
about just such a fiasco in his February 2 meeting with Dulles and
Doolittle.
  The flight plan for Powers on Sunday morning, May 1 , was the most
audacious that target selectors had designed since the inception of the
program in 1956, perhaps because they realized the safety margin for
the U-2 was rapidly eroding and there might not be many more flights.
Instead of a race course route that would end in the same region as the
mission began, Operation Grand Slam would carry Powers clear across
the midsection of the Soviet Union, from south to north. He would take
off at Peshawar and nine hours and 3,300 nautical miles later land at the
northern Norwegian seacoast town of Bodo. Along the way, Powers
could photograph the new missile base at Plesetsk, in the northwestern
corner of the Soviet Union, which CIA analysts were eager to examine
more closely. He would also pass over the test base at Tyuratam, the nu-
      clear research and bomb-making complex at Chelyabinsk, south of
Sverdlovsk, and a number of other military sites. The duration of the
flight would give the Russians plenty of time to track the U-2 and get
their latest antiaircraft missiles into the air.
   Mission 4154, code-named Operation Grand Slam, was the twenty-
fourth U-2 flight deep into Soviet airspace. For Powers, who was a vet-
      eran of the U-2 program, it was the second such flight. He had also
flown the spy plane over China and piloted the U-2 along Soviet border
areas six times. The aircraft selected for the flight was article 360, which
Lockheed had rebuilt after a crash landing in September 1959. It was
equipped with one of the new Pratt & Whitney engines.
   Powers took off thirty minutes behind schedule because of difficulties
in relaying the final order from Washington to Peshawar. "Once air-
                       306        Secret      Empire


borne," the CIA recorded in its history of the plane, "Powers guided his
aircraft toward Afghanistan. Following standard operating procedure,
Powers clicked his radio switch when he reached penetration altitude of
66,000 feet, which signaled the operations unit at [deleted] that every-
      thing aboard the aircraft was working and the mission would proceed as

planned."
  Soviet radar detected the plane while it was still over Afghanistan.
Burned by the failure to bring down Ericson three weeks earlier, Soviet
forces were primed to respond. Because it was May Day, a major holiday
in the Soviet Union, there was little military air traffic to distract de-
      fense units, and civilian air travel in the affected region was quickly
banned. Powers didn't know it, but he was headed into an aerial shoot-
    ing gallery ideally set up to track and attack his plane.
  "This latest flight, towards Sverdlovsk, was an especially deep pene-
       tration into our territory and therefore an especially arrogant violation
of our sovereignty," Khrushchev recalled. "We were sick and tired of
these unpleasant surprises, sick and tired of being subjected to these in-
          dignities. They were making these flights to show up our impotence.
Well, we weren't impotent any longer."
   Four and a half hours into his flight, Powers neared Sverdlovsk, an
important political and industrial center on the eastern flank of the
Urals. In 1918, the deposed Czar Nicholas II and his family, who had
been brought to the city after the revolution and kept there under house
arrest, were executed in Sverdlovsk by the Bolsheviks. If CIA flight
planners had realized there was a new missile battery in the area they
would have set a different course. Unluckily for Powers and Eisen-
         hower, the existence of the site was not known in Washington. The Rus-
     sians fired three SA-2 missiles. One mistakenly hit a Soviet fighter that
was pursuing the U-2, instantly destroying the Russian plane. A second
missile flew harmlessly off course. The third detonated at 70,500 feet,
just behind the U-2.
   Powers felt a thud as an orange fireball lit up the sky around the air-
       craft. "Instinctively I grasped the throttle with my left hand, and keep-
    ing my right hand on the wheel, checked instruments. All readings
normal. Engine functioning O.K. The right wing started to droop. I
         "Capsule       Recovered        Undamaged"               307

turned the wheel and it came back up. Fine. Now the nose, very slowly,
started to go down. Proper correction for that is to pull back on the
wheel to bring it up. I pulled, but it kept going down. Either the control
cable had severed or the tail was gone. I knew then that I had no control
of the aircraft."
   Kelly Johnson's fragile aircraft, notoriously temperamental even in
normal flight conditions, was breaking up and spinning toward earth.
Powers struggled against the powerful centrifugal forces to deal with
the emergency. Fearful that his legs would be severed if he activated the
ejection seat, he pushed the cockpit canopy free so he could bail out. He
later said he tried to arm the destruction device aboard the plane before
he exited but was thrown partway out of the cockpit as soon as he re-
        leased his seat belt. With the loss of cabin pressure, Powers's pressure
suit had inflated, just as Joe Ruseckas at the David Clark Company had
planned. That may have helped save his life, but it also further restricted
his movements. The only thing holding Powers to the airplane was the
oxygen hose attached to his suit. He could no longer reach the destruc-
      tion switch, which was designed to blow up the camera but not the en-
     tire aircraft. As the plane neared the ground, the hose broke and Powers
fell free of the aircraft. His parachute automatically opened. He landed
on the grounds of a collective farm outside Sverdlovsk, where he was
quickly captured. What was left of the plane, which was a good deal
more than the experts had assured Eisenhower would survive a crash,
plowed into the ground nearby.
  When Powers failed to arrive in Bodo, word was relayed to Washing-
    ton that the U-2 was overdue. Goodpaster was informed at home and
phoned the president, who was spending the weekend at Camp David.
"One of our reconnaissance planes on a scheduled flight is overdue and
possibly lost," he informed Eisenhower.
   Michael Beschloss recounted their brief but telling conversation in
Mayday, his book about the downing of the U-2.
  "Goodpaster recalled the president's old forecast of what could hap-
    pen ifa U-2 crashed in Russia and predicted that 'the winds are going to
blow.'
  " 'You're probably right,' came the reply."
                       308         Secret     Empire


  Unbeknownst to Eisenhower and everyone else in Washington,
Khrushchev not only had the wreckage of an American spy plane to
show the world, he had a live American pilot. He cannily set a trap that
unwittingly but perfectly capitalized on Bissell's misguided plan for
dealing with a shootdown. The Kremlin would denounce the spy flight,
but in hopes of luring Washington into a misleading explanation of the
affair, would say nothing initially about the capture of Powers. "Our in-
          tention here was to confuse the government circles of the United
States," Khrushchev later said.
   Having ignored Edwin Land and Jim Killian's sound advice back in
June 1956 to deal forthrightly with the loss of a plane over Soviet terri-
     tory, Bissell set in motion the flimsy cover story that he and the CIA had
concocted and sold to Eisenhower. Instead of taking responsibility for
the flight, and informing the world that it had been employing the U-2
for years to prevent a surprise attack — the public relations strategy rec-
               ommended byLand and Killian — the Eisenhower administration
claimed that a NASA weather observation plane had gone astray while
flying near the Turkish-Soviet border.
   The plan was simple — and breathtakingly dishonest.
   A secret White House summary provided an abbreviated script: "Fol-
         lowing iscover plan to be implemented immediately: 'U-2 aircraft was
on weather mission originating Adana, Turkey. Purpose was study of
clear air turbulence. During flight in Southeast Turkey, pilot reported
he had oxygen difficulties. The last word heard at 0700Z over emer-
       gency frequency. U-2 aircraft did not land Adana as planned and it can
only be assumed is now down. A search effort is under way in Lake Van

 area.' "
   Though journalists and historians often point to the government's
lies about Vietnam and Watergate as the pivotal events that undermined
the faith of Americans in the honesty and integrity of their government,
the Eisenhower administration's handling of the U-2 incident struck an
earlier and powerful blow to the body politic that should not be under-
            estimated. Iset
                        t a shocking new standard of deceit at the time, and left
many Americans wondering whether they could trust their leaders.
   Unaware that Powers had survived and been captured, the adminis-
         "Capsule        Recovered          Undamaged"                 309

tration dispatched a NASA spokesman to present the cover story to
the press. Lincoln White, a State Department spokesman, repeated the
same line later in the day, confidently telling correspondents that
the pilot had radioed back to base to report he was having problems with
the oxygen system. White said, "It is entirely possible that having a fail-
    ure in the oxygen equipment, which could result in the pilot losing con-
                 sciousness, the plane continued on automatic pilot for a considerable
distance and accidentally violated Soviet airspace."
  Jack Raymond of the New York Times, citing the NASA statement, re-
       ported, "The plane was flying at an altitude close to 55,000 feet, making
weather observations over the Lake Van area of Turkey as part of a
world-wide research program begun in 1956." Eisenhower later told
congressional leaders he had endorsed the cover story only after being
assured by Bissell and his colleagues that the phony account would hold.
"It would have been good to count to ten" before putting out the story,
he said.

   Khrushchev was ready to pounce. He later recalled, "As long as the
Americans thought the pilot was dead, they would keep putting out the
story that perhaps the plane had accidentally strayed off course and had
been shot down in the mountains on the Soviet side of the border." On
Saturday, May 7, Khrushchev gleefully announced that the Russians had
captured Powers and that he had confessed the flight was a spy mission
designed to photograph Soviet military installations all the way from
Afghanistan to Norway.
  The stunning news flashed around the world. A panicked and unpre-
      pared Eisenhower administration, after remaining publicly silent all
day, responded that evening by confirming the espionage flight but in-
       sisting no one in Washington had authorized the mission.
   The half-baked response, cooked up on Saturday afternoon in Wash-
        ington bya group of senior officials, including Secretary of State
Herter, had been cleared by Eisenhower late in the afternoon. He had
chosen to spend the weekend at Gettysburg so as not to seem preoccu-
     pied bythe U-2 affair. After talking with Herter on the phone about the
plan, Eisenhower told Goodpaster he feared the statement "might
prove to be a mistake." It was.
                      310        Secret     Empire


   Lincoln White, whose credibility was pulverized by the U-2 affair,
was dispatched again to feed the press the revised fiction. He offered a
statement that still stands as one of the most brazen lies ever uttered by
the American government. "As a result of the inquiry ordered by the
President it has been established that insofar as the authorities in Wash-
       ington are concerned there was no authorization for any such flight as
described by Mr. Khrushchev."
   Having disclaimed direct responsibility for the flight, White went on
to concede that there likely had been a deliberate invasion of Soviet air-
       space. "It appears that in endeavoring to obtain information now con-
          cealed behind the Iron Curtain a flight over Soviet territory was
probably undertaken by an unarmed civilian U-2 plane."
  James Reston, the Washington bureau chief of the New York Times,
chronicled the administration's reaction in a front-page story that aptly
captured the surreal quality of the day in Washington.
  "The United States admitted tonight that one of this country's planes
equipped for intelligence purposes had 'probably' flown over Soviet ter-
ritory.

  "An official statement stressed, however, that 'there was no authori-
       zation for any such flight' from authorities in Washington.
   "As to who might have authorized the flight, officials refused to com-
       ment. Ifthis particular flight of the U-2 was not authorized here, it
could only be assumed that someone in the chain of command in the
Middle East or Europe had given the order."
   The implication of the administration's statements was unavoidable:
either it was lying or it was incompetent. The idea that an American spy
plane could be sent over Soviet territory without the direct approval of
top officials in Washington seemed fantastic. It reinforced the prevail-
    ing view that Eisenhower was not minding the store. The fact that he
had spent Saturday afternoon golfing in Gettysburg only added to the
picture of presidential detachment.
  Reston, unaware that Eisenhower kept a tight leash on the U-2 pro-
      gram and approved each flight plan, hit the competence issue hard in a
Sunday opinion piece. "The heart of the problem here is that the presi-
      dency has been parceled out, first to Sherman Adams, then to John Fos-
         "Capsule      Recovered        Undamaged"               311


ter Dulles, and in this case to somebody else — probably to Allen Dulles,
but we still don't know."
  Walter Lippmann concurred in the New York Herald Tribune. "In
denying that it authorized the flight, the Administration has entered a
plea of incompetence," he wrote.
   The mishandling of the affair seemed like a replay of the administra-
       tion's feckless response to Sputnik nearly three years earlier. After
watching the doubts escalate on Sunday, Reston reported: "This was a
sad and perplexed capital tonight, caught in a swirl of charges of clumsy
administration, bad judgment and bad faith.
   "It was depressed and humiliated by the United States having been
caught spying over the Soviet Union and trying to cover up its activities
in a series of misleading official announcements."
   Eisenhower returned to work Monday morning in a glum mood. "I
would like to resign," he told Ann Whitman, his secretary. She recorded
in her diary that the president "seemed very depressed in the morning,
but by afternoon he had bounced back with his characteristic ability to
accept the bad news, not dwell on it, and so go ahead."
   Vice President Nixon and Thomas Gates, the secretary of defense,
were appalled by the dodgy strategy that Herter had devised. Gates tele-
         phoned the secretary of state early Monday morning to complain, say-
    ing somebody had to take responsibility for the policy. An hour later
Nixon called Herter with the same message. Nixon bluntly warned that
the assertion that the president was unaware of the spy flights created
the impression that a war could start without Eisenhower's knowledge.
   Between the two calls, Eisenhower telephoned Herter to say that
perhaps Allen Dulles should make a statement that the president had
long ago made clear he wanted the government to collect intelligence
information about Soviet military forces and fully realized that such
spying would require unusual methods.
   Later that day Herter tried to still the commotion by conceding to re-
         porters that Washington had, in fact, been flying spy missions around
and over the Soviet Union for years to protect against surprise attack.
This was a critical admission, a rare acknowledgment by the United
States that it was conducting peacetime espionage operations. To shield
                       312       Secret      Empire


Eisenhower, however, Herter falsely said that specific missions had not
required presidential approval. Eisenhower himself wanted to maintain
this posture in hopes that some separation from day-to-day manage-
      ment of the U-2 flights would preserve his ability to work with Khru-
           shchev and retain his high standing in world opinion. He told the
National Security Council "the impression should not be given that the
President has approved specific flights, precise missions or the timing of

specific flights."
   Eisenhower belatedly addressed the U-2 affair himself on Wednes-
     day, May 1 1, at a news conference. Though the immediate subject was
the U-2, the president spoke broadly and bluntly about the need for re-
       liable intelligence information. His remarks were the most complete
statement he had ever given the nation about his administration's secret
reconnaissance programs. Since he did not mention Corona or any of
the other reconnaissance projects that were still in the development
stage, the American people had no idea that Eisenhower was describing
one of the most ambitious — and successful — initiatives of his presi-
dency.

    "No one wants another Pearl Harbor," Eisenhower said. "This
means that we must have knowledge of military forces and preparations
around the world, especially those capable of massive surprise attacks.
. . . since the beginning of my administration I have issued directives to
gather, in every feasible way, the information required to protect the
United States and the free world against surprise attack and to enable
them to make effective preparations for defense."
  Addressing the clandestine nature of the spying activities, Eisen-
       hower said, "These have a special and secret character. They are, so to
speak, 'below the surface' activities. They are secret because they must
circumvent measures designed by other countries to protect secrecy of
military preparations. They are divorced from the regular visible agen-
     cies of government which stay clear of operational involvement in spe-
      cific detailed activities."
   "We do not use our Army, Navy or Air Force for this purpose, first to
avoid any possibility of the use of force in connection with these activi-
     ties, and second, because our military forces, for obvious reasons, can-
          "Capsule        Recovered           Undamaged"                  313

not be given latitude under broad directives but must be kept under
strict control in every detail."
   Tensions escalated sharply over the next few days as Khrushchev
threatened to attack foreign air bases used by American spy planes. Sec-
       retary ofState Herter said Washington would not hesitate to continue
the reconnaissance missions and Khrushchev warned that further spy
flights could lead to war.
   Harry Truman, no doubt sensing the U-2 affair could help the Dem-
        ocrats, interrupted his retirement to boast, incorrectly, that he had re-
        jected proposals for aerial espionage flights over the Soviet Union
during his administration. "Espionage is a dirty deal," he told reporters
in Chicago. "I didn't want to be part of it." Either his memory of au-
                 thorizing early overflights of the Soviet Union had failed or he had de-
       cided it was politically convenient to act as if Eisenhower and the
Republicans had come up with the idea.
  Much of the public mystery about the U-2 was eliminated on May 1 5
by a story by Hanson Baldwin, the military correspondent of the Times,
who had been holding back information about the reconnaissance pro-
      gram for years in deference to national security considerations.
Baldwin's long account, which the Times cautiously printed deep inside
the Sunday paper rather than displaying it on the front page, was an im-
           pressively comprehensive history at a time when almost everything
about the development and use of the plane was still heavily classified.
Among other things, Baldwin stripped away any remaining doubt about
Eisenhower's role in managing the flights. "The actual air reconnais-
       sance program over Russia was known to, and authorized by, President
Eisenhower himself and the National Security Council. The Central
Intelligence Agency was the directing agency and provided the funds.
The U-2 program had been known to a few key Congressmen and to
others at the top in Washington for years, but the secret was closely
guarded. Whether top officials in Washington knew ahead of time of
the May 1 flight is unknown, but no orders from Washington, which
closely controlled the overall program, were sent to halt such 'over-
        flights'ofRussia."
   Eisenhower's worst fears about the diplomatic consequences of los-
                       314        Secret      Empire


ing a U-2 over the Soviet Union were realized at the opening session of
the four-power summit conference in Paris on the morning of May 16.
Khrushchev angrily told Eisenhower he was no longer welcome to visit
the Soviet Union in June and announced there was no point in continu-
    ing the meeting because the Americans had refused to apologize for
the flight. Though Eisenhower announced he had suspended U-2
flights and would not resume them — concessions that Khrushchev had
demanded — the gathering ended abruptly and acrimoniously the
next day.

  Instead of defrosting the cold war, which had been Eisenhower's ar-
     dent hope for the summit, the meeting left the world tenser than ever.
The White House could blame Khrushchev for wrecking the summit
conference, but everyone knew the U-2 flight had handed him the per-
    fect excuse.
  Eisenhower addressed the nation about the U-2 affair and the col-
     lapse ofthe Paris summit meeting in a televised speech on May 25. To-
     ward the end of the broadcast, he gave the country its first glimpse of the
remarkable pictures that could be produced by Kelly Johnson's aircraft
and Jim Baker's powerful lenses. As a photograph of a military base ap-
         peared on the screen, Eisenhower said, "This is a photograph of the
North Island Naval Station in San Diego. It was taken from an altitude
of more than 70,000 feet. You may not perhaps be able to see them on
your television screens, but the white lines in the parking strips around
the field are clearly discernible from 1 3 miles up. Those lines are just 6
inches wide."
   Paying tribute to the accomplishments of the U-2 program, Eisen-
       hower told the nation, "It must be remembered that over a long period
these flights had given us information of the greatest importance to the
nation's security. In fact, their success has been nothing short of remark-

 able."
   The irony of the Powers flight could not have been lost on Dick
Leghorn, Edwin Land, Kelly Johnson, and the other men who had cre-
     ated the plane and its reconnaissance equipment. An aircraft that had
done so much to stabilize the cold war ended its service over the Soviet
        "Capsule Recovered Undamaged"                           315

Union as the centerpiece of a painfully embarrassing episode for the
United States.
  The U-2 never flew again over the Soviet Union. Even so, the pro-
      gram, as George Tenet, the director of Central Intelligence, said in
1998, "constituted nothing less than a revolution in intelligence."
   The CIA calculated that in four years of intermittent service, the U-2
program generated 1,285,000 feet of film, covering 1.3 million square
miles of Soviet territory, or roughly 1 5 percent of the Soviet landmass.
From that film, Arthur Lundahl and his photo interpreters determined
that there was no bomber gap and correctly surmised that the Russians
were not fielding hundreds of intercontinental missiles. They also mon-
          itored the development of Moscow's nuclear weapons programs, track-
      ing the production of bomb-making materials and the testing of
weapons. With the help of U-2 photographs, the Pentagon revised and
refined the list of targets that American bombers and missiles would
strike if war began, and pinpointed the location of the radar complexes,
airfields, and other Soviet defense sites that attacking forces would have
to overcome.
  Looking back over the program not long after Powers was shot down,
Allen Dulles said of the U-2, "in terms of reliability, of precision, of ac-
     cess to otherwise inaccessible installations, its contribution has been
unique. And in the opinion of the military, of the scientists and of the
senior officials responsible for our national security it has been, to put it

simply, invaluable."
   He told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, meeting in secret
session at the end of May 1960, that the U-2 project "was one of the
most valuable intelligence collection operations that any country has
ever mounted at any time."
   It was all true, but once Eisenhower grounded the fleet, he lost the
only means he had to look deep inside the Soviet Union. As Bissell was
still dealing with the stinging fallout from the Powers flight, he had to
turn his attention back to Corona. The moment Power's plane crashed
outside Sverdlovsk, the satellite project became Washington's number
one intelligence priority.
                          316          Secret      Empire


  When the National Security Council convened at the White House
on May 24, several cabinet members stressed the need to move ahead
quickly with satellite projects, though there was apparently no specific
reference to Corona by name to preserve the secrecy of the program.
   "Secretary Herter said he hoped we would move ahead fast and not
back down with respect to the reconnaissance satellite program," the
minutes of the meeting noted. "In Paris, Khrushchev's reaction had
been extraordinary when De Gaulle [President Charles De Gaulle of
France] chided him about the Soviet 'space ship' which was going over
Paris sixteen to eighteen times a day. Khrushchev said he did not care
how many satellites flew over his territory. Secretary Herter thought it
would be very useful for our allies and other friendly nations of the Free
World to be reassured that if one kind of reconnaissance against surprise
attack had to be suspended, another kind would soon be available. The
President agreed and added that in Paris Khrushchev had said anyone
might take all the pictures he wished from satellites over Soviet terri-

tory."
  Despite the attraction of publicizing the secret satellite programs to
reassure the nation that the loss of the U-2 would not cripple America's
ability to gather intelligence on Soviet military forces, Eisenhower de-
       clined todo so. "With respect to questions that might be asked about re-
                      connaissance satellites," the minutes of the meeting continued, "the
President thought that Administration officials need not attempt to
reply to every question which some idiot was able to ask. He felt it
would be enough to quote Khrushchev's statement. If we went too far in
describing our reconnaissance satellites, information concerning their
infra-red and all their other capabilities would become public."
   Eisenhower could also take heart that the Russians had registered no
complaint about a NASA weather satellite, Tiros I, that had been placed
in orbit on April 1 and had merrily been taking pictures of the cloud
cover over the Soviet Union and electronically relaying them back to
earth. The cameras aboard the satellite were nowhere near as powerful
as the system built for Corona and served no useful intelligence pur-
       pose. Nor was its electronic transmission system precise enough to
         "Capsule      Recovered         Undamaged"               317


transmit finely detailed pictures, but it did show that images could be re-
       layed back to earth electronically, even if in a primitive fashion.
   The White House meeting ended with a decision to review the status
of various satellite programs to determine if they could be accelerated.
Gates said it would take an additional $40 million to speed up the work.
Eisenhower asked Kistiakowsky, his science adviser, to look into the
matter and report back to him.
  It didn't require an advanced degree to realize that most of the satel-
    lite projects sponsored by the CIA and Pentagon were in trouble. The
only program that seemed near success was an Air Force project de-
        signed to provide instant warning of missile launches around the world.
The satellite system, which had been named Sentry and later renamed
Midas (for Missile Defense Alarm System), employed infrared sensors
to detect the heated exhaust plume produced by missiles as they climbed
into the sky. By chance, the Atlas rocket carrying the first Midas into
orbit was launched from Cape Canaveral the same day as the National
Security Council meeting. It was placed in an equatorial orbit and did
not pass over the Soviet Union as it circled the earth.
   Corona, of course, could claim no such luck. By the time the U-2
went down, there had been twelve Discoverer launch attempts, includ-
    ing the first abortive countdown that hadn't been officially counted.
The Agena spacecraft had reached orbit just seven times, and not one
capsule had been recovered. The Air Force, for its part, was stumbling
along with several other projects, the latest iteration of RAND 's original
video-transmission satellite proposal, now known as the Samos pro-
       gram. In this system, film would be developed aboard the satellite and
the pictures would then be scanned and beamed back to earth. The
Tiros I used similar technology.
   Even before Eisenhower asked him to review the satellite programs,
Kistiakowsky knew they were foundering. He had told Gordon Gray,
the national security adviser, that "the whole intelligence business is in
chaos." He thought a committee of high-powered scientists and techni-
    cal experts should be appointed to examine the projects.
   Two days after the National Security Council meeting, Kistiakowsky
                       318        Secret     Empire


went over his idea with the president, Gray, and Goodpaster. He was
just warming to the subject, ready to give Eisenhower a bill of particu-
     lars about satellite problems, when the president interrupted. He re-
       called, "My account of the unsatisfactory progress of the Discoverer and
Samos satellite projects was cut short by the president, who didn't re-
     quire more than a small fraction of the ammunition I had to decide in
the firmest possible terms that a corrective action was necessary."
   Congress was also eager to give satellite projects a jolt. Worried about
a "reconnaissance gap" after Eisenhower terminated U-2 flights over
the Soviet Union, the Senate Appropriations Committee voted on June
10 to add $84 million to the Samos program. The increase more than
made up for the $50 million that the Pentagon had excised from the
Samos budget in mid-April. Because Corona was secret, no money was
publicly earmarked for the CIA project.
   As far as most Americans knew, spy satellites remained a distant hope.
In mid-June, Hanson Baldwin of the Times reported, "Reconnaissance
satellites are still in a very early stage of development — though some
prototype launchings have been conducted and some components of
the system tested." After describing the Midas and Samos projects, but
making no mention of Corona, Baldwin advised readers that "Midas
and Samos and other reconnaissance satellites, though theoretically
within the state of the art, are practically at least two to three years, per-
      haps more, away."
   There wasn't a lot that Bissell could say to blunt the growing impa-
         tience at the White House and on Capitol Hill. After the two Corona
failures in April, he had once against suspended launch operations as
Plummer and his engineers frantically tried to debug the whole system.
They failed. On June 29, Discoverer XII blasted off from Vandenberg,
carrying a package of diagnostic instruments rather than a camera.
Once again, the Agena fell short of orbit.
   While the dismal record didn't give Bissell or Plummer much reason
for hope, success was closer than they realized. Through the long
months of reevaluation and modification, many of the problems had
been remedied. The arrival of the new polyester-based film coated with
a high-resolution emulsion had eliminated one of the most serious mal-
         "Capsule       Recovered         Undamaged"                 319


adies, the shattering of the acetate-based strips first shipped by Kodak.
Changes in the thermal painting applied to the exterior of the Agena ve-
      hicle helped to stabilize the temperature in the satellite at safe levels for
operating the delicate equipment. The weight of the Agena, including
the reconnaissance gear it carried, had been reduced, in some cases with
the use of metal shears and files. Battery power and reliability had been
improved. And in one of the most important engineering adjustments,
Willis M. Hawkins, a Lockheed executive, suggested that a cold-gas
propulsion system be substituted for the unreliable solid-propellant
rockets that were supposed to stabilize the recovery vehicle during reen-
    try. A number of the rockets had exploded or not fired simultaneously
when activated. The replacement system was much less temperamental.
The engineers had also refined the timing and accuracy of the crucial
maneuvers that put the satellite recovery vehicle into a descent trajec-
    tory that would bring it down in the target area off Hawaii. The tiniest
imperfections in this space choreography had several times been re-
          sponsible forsending the spacecraft hopelessly off course.
  Improvised repairwork was fairly common, often using whatever was
handy. A case in point was the answer to the excessive heat that devel-
      oped during ascent at the point where the recovery capsule — the tip of
the rocket — was joined to the rest of the satellite vehicle. This seam was
right above the section of the satellite where the camera and film were
housed. Some kind of cooling element was needed in the area where the
heat built up. "I got to thinking, well, the way you normally cool things
is by evaporating a liquid," Jim Plummer recalled. "I said, why couldn't
we put an epoxy seal or ring around that so we have a void we can put
water in, then put pinholes in the skin and let the water evaporate and
take the heat away. Well, we didn't like the idea of water near the film, so
I said go down and buy a bunch of sanitary napkins. We stuck the ring
full of those and inserted a measured amount of water. That's high-risk
engineering."
  The next launch came on August 10. Like the previous mission at the
end of June, Discoverer XIII was designed primarily to monitor the per-
           formance ofthe various components rather than to take photographs.
No camera and film were installed aboard the Agena. At the last minute,
                      320        Secret     Empire


Plummer stowed an American flag in the recovery capsule. It wasn't
easy to find one the right size, and he had to race from Palo Alto to San
Jose in his Porsche roadster on a Saturday morning to pick up the flag at
a hardware store moments before it closed. "I didn't want an old beat up
flag," he recalled.
   Early on the afternoon of August 10, with Vandenberg shrouded in
fog, the Thor booster lifted off the pad with a deafening roar. For a
change, everything worked nearly perfectly. The Agena settled into
orbit and during the seventeenth revolution around the earth, as the
spacecraft passed over Alaska, the recovery vehicle was ejected and
began the descent toward the Pacific Ocean, where recovery planes
from Hawaii were waiting in the air. The return capsule missed the tar-
     get area, making an air snatch impossible, but splashed down close
enough that one of the Navy ships assigned to the mission, the U.S.S.
Haiti Victory, reached it while the capsule was still afloat. It was the
morning of August 12. Maj. R. J. Ford of the Air Force flashed an en-
            crypted cable to Washington. "Capsule recovered undamaged." A se-
     cret history of the Corona project noted, "It was both the shortest and
the most welcome of the thousands of communications over that net-
     work in the previous two years."
  Back in Palo Alto, Plummer and his colleagues cheered their belated
triumph. Later that day they celebrated at Rickey's, a local hotel, where
Plummer, still dressed in a suit and tie, was joyfully tossed into the
swimming pool. Decades later, Plummer still treasured a photograph
that captured the scene. It shows him standing by the pool in his
drenched outfit, holding a wet victory cigar in his right hand and sport-
    ing abroad smile.
   It was the first time a man-made object had been recovered from
orbit. (Ten days later, the Russians matched the feat when Sputnik V,
carrying two dogs, Belka and Strelka, landed safely on Soviet territory.)
The American water recovery technique, which was a fallback option
for Corona, was soon adapted by NASA for the manned space program.
   The recovery was front-page news. John Finney wrote about it in the
Times. Though Finney still did not realize that the Discoverer program
was actually a shell game employed to disguise a spy satellite project, he
         "Capsule Recovered Undamaged"                              321

recognized that the recovery technology had important implications.
"The technological feat marks an important step toward the develop-
     ment ofreconnaissance satellites that will be able to spy from space. The
same ejection and recovery techniques eventually will be used for re-
        turning photographs taken by reconnaissance satellites."
  Excited by the success of Discoverer XIII, Bissell and Ritland moved
quickly to the next launch, on August 18. This time the satellite would
carry a camera and 20 pounds of film. Discoverer XIV blasted off from
Vandenberg just before 1 p.m. The Agena reached orbit, but initially
failed to stabilize itself in the proper position and threatened to start
tumbling through space. Fortunately, the satellite righted itself and the
camera began working. With each orbit, the satellite passed over a new
swath of Soviet territory, much of it never before photographed by the
United States. As ground stations silently tracked the satellite, techni-
     cians could tell that the camera was working and the film was collecting
in the capsule. On the seventeenth orbit, as planned, the recovery cap-
     sule was ejected and maneuvered into position to begin the plunge back
to earth. The heat shield did its job as the bucket descended, and the
parachutes deployed right on time.
  The date was Friday, August 19, a warm, clear summer afternoon in
Hawaii. Capt. Harold E. Mitchell of Bloomington, Illinois, piloting a
C-l 19 Flying Boxcar, snagged the capsule at 8,500 feet on his third pass
and delivered it to Hickam Air Force Base outside Honolulu. "I was so
nervous I could hardly handle it," Mitchell told reporters. The midair
catch was one of the top news stories of the day. The next morning's edi-
     tion of the New York Times displayed a three-column, three-line head-
      line: "Space Capsule Is Caught in Mid-Air by U.S. Plane on Re-Entry
from Orbit." The story included only a brief reference to possible espi-
         onage applications of the recovery. In an extraordinary quirk of history,
the other big story of the day was the espionage conviction in Moscow
of Francis Gary Powers, who was sentenced to ten years in a Soviet
prison. Only a handful of Americans who were privy to the secrets of
Corona realized that the conviction fell on the same day that the nation
collected the first photographs of the Soviet Union taken by a spy satel-
lite.
                       322       Secret     Empire


  From Hawaii the capsule was transported to Sunnyvale, and on to the
East Coast, where the film was processed in Rochester, New York, by
Kodak and brought to Art Lundahl and his photo analysis crew in the
Steuart Building on New York Avenue in Washington. Lundahl and his
colleagues gathered in a large, secure room on the fourth floor for their
first look at the pictures. After every U-2 mission, the photo interpreters
had assembled when the film arrived to be briefed about the targets that
had been covered during the flight. The route of the plane would be
shown as a thin, circuitous line on a map of the Soviet Union. With the
appearance of the Corona film, there was a stunning new map. It
showed the passage of the satellite over Soviet territory in six or seven
wide, bold stripes, beginning in the polar region and sweeping south
across the country.
   Dino A. Brugioni, one of Lundahl's top aides, recalled the scene years
later. "There was elation, just a feeling of joy. For most of the areas cov-
       ered, we didn't have anything. It was the first time we'd seen these

places."
  "When the film from Mission 9009 arrived at the Steuart Build-
    ing ... it was the start of a new era," said David Doyle, an imagery ana-
lyst.
   Lundahl and Bissell were soon headed to the White House with a se-
        lection ofpictures to brief Eisenhower. "I remember how gratified the
president was," recalled Goodpaster, who attended the presentation.
"After all those failures, we had finally succeeded. We knew it was of his-
      toric importance."
   The 20 pounds of film — about 3,600 feet — covered more than 1.5
million square miles of the Soviet Union. It was, as Bissell noted in his
memoirs, "more coverage than all the pictures of that country taken
during the entire U-2 program."
   The resolution was good — objects with a dimension of 35 feet or
more could be identified. Considering that the pictures had been shot
from more than 100 miles out in space, the quality was remarkable. It
was better than Land had predicted when he and Jim Killian first out-
     lined the Corona plans to Eisenhower early in 1958. However, the reso-
        lution was not as sharp as Leghorn had promised when he sold the Itek
          "Capsule         Recovered           Undamaged"                    323


camera design to Bissell or as fine as Bissell had advertised to Eisen-
      hower when seeking formal approval for the project in April 1958. The
pictures were certainly not as detailed as those taken by the U-2, which
flew at an altitude of 1 3 miles and had a resolution of less than 2 feet.
   Still, the first batch of Corona images gave the photo interpreters
plenty to examine, including sixty-four airfields and twenty-six surface-
to-air missile sites that Washington had never seen before. Once the
Corona satellites went into operation, the missile gap quickly disap-
      peared— or more accurately, turned in America's favor.
   On February 5, 1961, just days after taking office as John F.
Kennedy's secretary of defense, Robert McNamara told reporters at a
background briefing in his Pentagon office that there was no disparity in
the number of American and Soviet operational strategic missiles. The
next day, the New York Times carried a page-one story under the head-
     line, "Kennedy Defense Study Finds No Evidence of a 'Missile Gap.' "
   The coup de grace was a National Intelligence Estimate on Soviet
long-range ballistic missiles that was delivered to President Kennedy in
September 1961. It said: "New information, providing a much firmer
base for estimates on Soviet long-range ballistic missiles, has caused a
sharp downward revision in our estimate of present Soviet ICBM
strength but strongly supports our estimate of medium-range missile
strength. We now estimate that the present Soviet ICBM strength is in
the range of 10-25 launchers from which missiles can be fired against
the US, and that this force level will not increase markedly during the
months immediately ahead."
   Eisenhower seems not to have left a record of his reaction upon see-
     ing the first Corona photographs. But his role in creating new intelli-
                       gence-gathering technologies was poignantly captured on February 1 3 ,
1969, eight years after he left the White House. Eisenhower was gravely
ill, resting at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington. President
Nixon ordered Richard Helms, the director of Central Intelligence, to
show the former president the latest photographs taken from space.
    Eisenhower lay in bed, propped up by several pillows. Because the
pictures were so secret, the blinds were drawn and doctors and nurses
asked to step outside. Helms, Arthur Lundahl, and Tom Logan,
                      324       Secret     Empire


LundahPs special assistant, arrived with a package of materials specially
selected for the occasion. Lundahl wanted to show Eisenhower how far
they had come since the first U-2 flight in 1956.
   Lundahl described the scene. "Mr. Helms sat to the left of the bed; I
stood on the right, and with Tom Logan standing at the foot of the bed
holding up the briefing boards, I went through the 'how it was and how

    is.'" men showed Eisenhower clear pictures of Soviet missile silos,
 itThe
shipyards, and submarine bases. Objects as small as 6 feet in size could
clearly be seen from 120 miles out in space. Eisenhower peered at the
pictures closely, marveling at the fine resolution and telling detail. He
took notes as Lundahl spoke.
  He seemed pleased to see how far the technology had advanced. "The
General was just absolutely flabbergasted about the improvements
achieved in the systems," Lundahl recalled. Eisenhower died six weeks
later.

   Though Eisenhower's determination to put new technologies to
work to defend the United States against surprise attack was perhaps the
greatest legacy of his presidency, the spy satellites that he helped create
remained so secret in his lifetime he said not a word about them in his
memoirs.
                         CHAPTER               FIFTEEN




                A Stradivarius, Not a
                    Cracker Box


Though          the Corona program was planned as a temporary mea-
                 sure to provide satellite photographs until the Air Force's more
technologically ambitious video transmission system could be per-
       fected, the CIA satellites were not easily dislodged. As refinements were
made in the camera system, the quality of the pictures improved sub-
            stantially, eventually making it possible to identify objects as small as 5
feet in size. The introduction in 1962 of a new camera system called
Mural, which utilized two cameras to take pictures from different an-
      gles, provided stereoscopic photos with a three-dimensional quality.
The volume of film increased as well over time, giving analysts an enor-
       mous quantity of film to review. By the time the program was nearing its
end in the early 1970s, the volume of film produced from each mission
had grown to 32,000 linear feet, a tenfold increase over the first success-
    ful flight in 1960. Later generations of Corona satellites carried two re-
           covery capsules, making it possible to extend the life of the satellite for
eighteen days while returning film to earth as the mission progressed.
   Art Lundahl gave some idea of the scale of the photographic harvest
from Corona satellites in describing a briefing with President Kennedy.
"When he had trouble understanding the magnitude of the film that
was involved, he said to me, 'Lundahl, give it to me in some single ex-
       ample can
             I   recall.' 'Well, Mr. President,' I said, 'if you like, think of it
as a single photograph which is wider than the right-hand side of the
freeway, extending from Washington to Baltimore, and we photo-
                                         325
                        326         Secret      Empire


interpreters, all of us, are crawling along on our hands and knees be-
       tween Washington and Baltimore looking for objects about the size of
the things on our watch.' "
   Lundahl's operation grew to keep pace with the flood of photo-
         graphs. The small CIA photo analysis shop that he had set up in the
early 1950s with a staff of thirteen people expanded to more than fifteen
hundred staff members by 1972. A special security system was created
for handling the Corona pictures and restricting access to them. The
system was called Talent-Keyhole, an adaptation of the system used for
U-2 photographs, which was labeled Talent. Everything involving
Corona was classified and stamped Talent-Keyhole.
   By the time the Corona program ended in 1972 after 145 launches —
quite a run for an interim system — it had covered more than 520 million
square miles of territory. By mid- 1964, the satellites had photographed
all twenty-five ICBM complexes in the Soviet Union. The total cost of
the program was $850 million, a real bargain.
   Before the return-film technology was retired, the Corona satellites
kept Washington informed about Soviet military forces, including the
introduction of new weapons, and created an invaluable photographic
archive about nearly every aspect of Soviet military power. That in-
         cluded all Soviet missile launching sites as well as the critically impor-
     tant naval construction facilities at Severodvinsk, on the White Sea

coast near Arkhangelsk, which produced the Soviet Union's fleet of
missile-carrying nuclear submarines. Hal Austin had flown over this
area on his 1954 flight. The Corona program provided crucial informa-
      tion about the Soviet nuclear weapons program, and air and ground
forces. It also made arms control agreements possible by providing the
means to monitor Soviet compliance and transformed the craft of map-
making by giving military cartographers photographs of the places they
were mapping. Looking back on Corona years later, Bud Wheelon, who
took over the Corona program at the CIA in 1963, called it "a triumph
of American technology."
   It was that, and something more. It played a critical role in preserving
the peace, limiting defense spending, and reducing the threat of nuclear
war.
       A Stradi varius, Not            a Cracker       Box          327


  President Lyndon Johnson summed it up nicely in 1967 during a visit
to Nashville. "We've spent $35 billion or $40 billion on the space pro-
          gram," he said. "And if nothing else had come of it except the knowl-
      edge we've gained from space photography, it would be worth 10 times
what the whole program has cost. Because tonight we know how many

missiles the enemy had and, it turned out, our guesses were way off". We
were doing things we didn't need to do. We were building things we
didn't need to build. We were harboring fears we didn't need to harbor."
   In 1985, on the twenty- fifth anniversary of the first successful Corona
flight, President Ronald Reagan addressed a gathering of Corona veter-
    ans. He told them, "President Eisenhower once remarked to General
George Goddard, the grand old man of this business, that without aer-
    ial reconnaissance 'you would only have your fears on which to plan
your own defense arrangements and your whole military establishment.
Now, if you are going to use nothing but fear . . . you are going to make
us an armed camp.' This is no less true today than in President Eisen-
        hower's time, and I reaffirm his conclusion that the knowledge which
only overhead reconnaissance can provide is absolutely vital for the
United States."
   That knowledge was so vital that policymakers and intelligence offi-
      cials wanted even more powerful spy satellites. In science and technol-
     ogy, landmark achievements have a way of raising expectations. That is
what happened in the early 1960s as American officials pored over the
torrent of photographs produced by the first series of Corona satellites.
The intelligence information gleaned from the satellites was breathtak-
    ing, yet it was imperfect. The pictures, though they covered a much
wider area than those produced by the U-2, lacked the clarity and detail
produced by the lower-flying spy plane. The recoverable satellite sys-
     tem, for all the ingenuity that went into creating it, was frustratingly
slow in moving photographs from space down to the desks of policy-
        makers inWashington. If there happened to be no satellite in orbit or
ready for launch when a foreign threat suddenly materialized, no satel-
    lite images were available to assist the president and his senior aides.
That weakness was highlighted during the Cuban missile crisis in Octo-
    ber 1962, when the Kennedy administration was forced to rely on the
                        328        Secret     Empire


U-2 and low-level reconnaissance flights by other aircraft over the is-
    land to monitor the installation of Soviet missile sites. Maj. Rudolph
Anderson, an Air Force U-2 pilot, was killed when his plane was shot
down over Cuba in late October.
  The limitations were evident again during the 1967 war in the Mid-
   dle East, when satellite pictures arrived too late to give Washington
much help in monitoring the brief but intense six-day conflict between
Israel and its Arab neighbors. In August 1968, a Corona satellite was not
nimble enough to warn the White House that Soviet forces were about
to invade Czechoslovakia to end the liberal reforms introduced by
Alexander Dubcek, the Czech leader. One reel of film shot early in Au-
      gust indicated an invasion was not imminent. A second batch recorded
by the same satellite later in the month showed Russian forces preparing
to attack. By the time that film arrived in Washington, the invasion had
begun.
   Bud Wheelon, as head of the CIA's Office of Scientific Intelligence,
which studied Soviet missiles and other weapons systems, worked
alongside Arthur Lundahl at the Steuart Building during the tense days
of the Cuban missile crisis and took part in the daily presentation of
photographs and other intelligence information to President Kennedy.
He was struck by the absence of satellite data as the showdown un-
        folded. The turnaround time for Corona wasn't fast enough. "Corona
was totally useless during the Cuban missile crisis because of the long
delay in getting the film back," Wheelon recalled. "We needed the data
back that day, not a month from now."
   Wheelon was soon in a position to do something about the problem.
In June 1963, at the age of thirty- four, he was given responsibility for
the CIA's science and technology activities. Richard Bissell had de-
       parted ayear earlier, a victim of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba,
which he directed. Though Kennedy at the last minute withheld air
support for the invasion by Cuban exiles trained by the CIA, he was nev-
           ertheless embarrassed by the clumsy attack and wanted new leadership
at the CIA. Unwilling to accept a demotion, Bissell resigned in February
1962, three months after Allen Dulles was replaced by John McCone, a
wealthy California businessman.
       A Stradivarius,          Not    a Cracker        Box         329


  By the time he exited, Bissell had lost favor with Jim Killian and
Edwin Land, who continued to exercise considerable influence over the
CIA's affairs. "Bissell found himself in a major struggle with Killian and
Land," the CIA noted in its secret history of the U-2. They had con-
       cluded that Bissell was not devoting sufficient attention to the overhead
reconnaissance programs. They were especially disturbed by BisselPs
use of the U-2 to gather intelligence for some of the Agency's covert ac-
      tions in Laos, not exactly the sort of high-minded missions they had in
mind when they had pressed Eisenhower to develop the plane. Killian
and Land found his attitude so troubling that they advised President
Kennedy in 1961 to take the reconnaissance work away from Bissell and
place it in a new science directorate that they favored creating at the
Agency.
   Reflecting on his career at the CIA, Bissell later noted candidly that
he departed "with successes and regrets and a legacy that still has not
been put to rest historically and perhaps never will be." That was cer-
      tainly true when Bissell died at the age of eighty- four in 1994. The New
York Times looked first to the Bay of Pigs invasion in writing about
BisselPs career. His role in directing the development of the U-2, the
Corona satellites, and the A- 12 supersonic spy plane, better known by
the designation of the Air Force model, the SR-71, was subordinated in
the obituary. The news judgment was understandable, but was a dis-
        service tohis role in revolutionizing the spy business.
  For a time after Bissell 's exit from the CIA, it looked as if the Agency
might drop out of the satellite business, yielding the field to the Penta-
      gon, which was pressing to gain control. Wheelon's appointment rallied
the CIA. Though relatively young and largely untested in Washington's
power centers, Wheelon turned out to be an inspired choice. As a pre-
             cocious Stanford- and MIT-trained physicist, he brought scientific
depth to the job. Several years of classified work untangling intercepted
flight data from Soviet missile tests had given him an appreciation for
the important role intelligence could play in managing the cold war.
From his perch at the Office of Scientific Intelligence, he correctly sus-
       pected that giving the Pentagon a monopoly on satellites might serve
short-term military needs but would deprive the nation of the kind of
                         330        Secret      Empire


broad-gauged strategic intelligence it needed to measure and contain
the Soviet threat. He proved to be tenacious in defending the interests
of the CIA and the nation.
   In three action-packed years that often found Wheelon in fierce bu-
              reaucratic combat with the Pentagon, he established a powerful and in-
          novative new Directorate of Science and Technology at the CIA. With
the help of James Killian and Edwin Land, Wheelon brought Kelly
Johnson's supersonic spy plane into operation after years of delay and
initiated work on three revolutionary new satellite systems that trans-
         formed the world of espionage in the closing decades of the twentieth
century as profoundly as the U-2 and Corona did in their day.
   Indeed, the dazzling capabilities of the systems that Wheelon set out
to build within months of his appointment in 1963 made the Corona
satellites look like Tinkertoys. Some of these systems, and the even
more advanced models that followed them, continue to serve the nation
today and play an important role in the war against terrorism. American
officials, for instance, can almost instantaneously look at satellite images
as they are recorded in space. The idea of waiting for a bucket of film to
drop back to earth seems almost quaint today. The photographic detail
of today's photos is so fine that someone in Washington looking at the
satellite image of a crowd of people in Moscow, Beijing, or Kabul can
clearly see individuals and objects the size of a football. Radar-based
imaging systems see through clouds and operate equally well during
the day and at night. Because the satellites can swing from side to side,
ground controllers can adjust the direction at which they are looking,
making it possible to aim first at one target and then switch to another.
Other satellites, many placed in stationary orbit high above the earth,
vacuum up worldwide electronic communications as the signals travel
through space.
  These satellites remain officially classified, but a good deal of infor-
       mation about them has seeped into the public domain over the years,
primarily through the research of journalists and scholars, congres-
        sional testimony, industry briefings, and from criminal cases involving
the illegal transfer of secret information about the satellites to the Soviet
Union.
       A Stradivarius,            Not    a Cracker        Box           331


   In 1994, looking back over Wheelon's record, William Perry, then
secretary of defense, said, "The national reconnaissance systems which
the United States now has, which are truly jewels in our crown, all stem,
in my judgment, from the creative work that Bud Wheelon did in the
sixties."
   When Wheelon took over the Agency's science and technology oper-
         ations, the CIA's pioneering scientific spirit was in danger of extinction.
The primary cause was the creation of a new reconnaissance office at the
Pentagon that tried to muscle the Agency out of the satellite business.
  The new office grew out of the Air Force's ineffectual efforts to pro-
      duce the Samos video-relay satellite, the original WS-117L project.
Troubled by mismanagement of the Samos project, Eisenhower in June
1960 had asked his aides to review the program and the way the Penta-
    gon went about developing and operating satellites. The inquiry was di-
       rected by George Kistiakowsky, Eisenhower's science adviser. One
outcome, favorable to the CIA, was to restructure and expand Arthur
Lundahl's photo interpretation organization. In one of his last acts as
president, in January 1 96 1 , Eisenhower folded the Pentagon's separate
photo analysis operations into Lundahl's center and renamed it the Na-
       tional Photographic Interpretation Center, emphasizing its role as the
primary source of imagery analysis for the government.
   The other major recommendation of the Kistiakowsky panel soon
produced trouble for the CIA. The group suggested establishment of a
new Pentagon organization to put military satellite programs more
firmly under high-level civilian management. The office was run by the
undersecretary of the Air Force. It posed no immediate threat to the
Agency when it opened for business, but it was quickly supplanted by a
more powerful entity, the National Reconnaissance Office, which was
created in September 1961. In theory, the NRO, whose existence was
widely known but officially classified until 1992, would coordinate
satellite projects by drawing on the resources of the CIA and the Air
Force. The hope was to institutionalize the high-level cooperation be-
       tween the Air Force and the CIA that was often evident during the U-2
and Corona programs. In reality, the idea was an invitation to conflict,
even though it was well intentioned and supported by Killian and Land,
                        332        Secret      Empire


whose clout on spy matters was undiminished as the presidency changed
hands in January 1961. Killian served as chairman of the White House
intelligence advisory board. Land was a member of the same board and
head of a separate panel that advised the CIA on technological issues.
   The new interagency arrangement worked relatively well at first
under the leadership of Joseph V. Charyk, the undersecretary of the Air
Force. Bissell, who had hoped to run the new organization while retain-
    ing his top job at the CIA, settled for a subsidiary role after Allen Dulles
advised him to steer clear of management responsibilities at the Penta-
      gon. Charyk, among other things, mapped out the structure of the
NRO, creating separate satellite programs for the Air Force, CIA, and
the Navy. In June 1960, two months before the first successful Corona
launch, the Naval Research Laboratory had placed in orbit a small satel-
    lite that collected Soviet radar signals. The Navy would later operate its
own fleet of spy satellites to track the movement of surface ships and
submarines. Charyk's basic organizational blueprint and designation of
the three divisions as Program A, Program B, and Program C caught on
and remained intact until 1993.
   But the harmony was short-lived. With Bissell wounded by the Bay of
Pigs debacle, the Pentagon moved to expand its authority over satellite
programs. Dulles, whose career was also mortally injured by the Cuban
fiasco, could not muster much opposition. When McCone took over at
the CIA, he initially acquiesced, not recognizing the importance of
overhead reconnaissance — or the money and power attendant to it. Not
long after taking charge of the CIA, McCone naively asked John
McMahon, an Agency official, "What are you people doing in the air-
       plane business?" Herbert J. Scoville Jr., known to his colleagues as Pete,
took over the CIA's research work when Bissell resigned and made a
valiant but unsuccessful effort to resist the Pentagon power grab. He
was also frustrated by a Balkanized array of science and technology of-
      fices at the CIA and McCone's indifference to scientific projects. After
fifteen months as the Agency's deputy director for research, he resigned
in disgust.
  McCone immediately offered the post to Wheelon. After consulting
       A Stradivarius,          Not    a Cracker        Box          333


with Scoville, Wheelon informed the CIA director he didn't want the
job unless McCone and the Kennedy administration were prepared to
roll back the erosion of CIA resources and guarantee the Agency a
major role in the development of new satellites. "I said this is even more
important than nuclear weapons, where two laboratories are competing
successfully. We've got to get this right and get the very best systems,"
Wheelon recalled. "The only organization in this field that's really done
anything worthwhile is the CIA, and you're ready to take them out of it.
Is that really in the national interest?" If McCone was unwilling to make
the commitment, Wheelon told him, he was quite prepared to quit and
move back to California.
   It was a brash performance for someone who had been at the CIA for
only a year, but no surprise to anyone who knew Wheelon. With a
Ph.D. in physics in his pocket by the time he was twenty-three, little tol-
       erance for political knavery, and potentially unlimited job options in the
academic world and the private sector, he had no desire to remain in
Washington for long. When he joined the CIA in 1962, Wheelon told
McCone he planned to stay no more than four years. "It's going to take
me a year to understand what needs to be done, two years to get it done,
and if I do it, I'm going to break enough crockery that I ought to leave in
four," he said. He exited after almost exactly four years.
   Wheelon was a whiz kid. Growing up in Southern California, he had
developed an interest in physics and engineering from his father,
Orville, an accomplished aeronautical engineer and the inventor of the
Verson-Wheelon press, a machine tool that changed the way aircraft
parts were made. Orville Wheelon was also the first aircraft builder to
work extensively with titanium, an achievement that won him a presti-
     gious Wright Brothers Award in 1952. His son would later come to ap-
           preciate the feat as he watched Kelly Johnson wrestle with the
supersonic A-12, which was built mostly with titanium. During World
War II, Bud Wheelon spent his summer vacations working at Douglas
Aircraft in Los Angeles, testing the seams and rivets on airplane fuel
tanks. A gifted math and science student, he enrolled at Stanford at the
age of sixteen. He was soon befriended by Fred Terman, the dean of the
                       334       Secret     Empire


engineering school, who encouraged Wheelon to disregard the re-
        quired engineering curriculum so he could take graduate-level courses
in physics and math. Terman pointed him to MIT for graduate work.
   The MIT Physics Department was a mecca for some of the nation's
brightest students, and the company that Wheelon kept in Cambridge
until he collected his Ph.D. in 1952 was quite extraordinary. He shared
an office with Murray Gell-Mann, who went on to win a Nobel Prize in
physics. Sidney Drell, a postdoctoral student, became the deputy direc-
    tor of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center and spent four decades
advising the government on intelligence and arms control issues after
Wheelon persuaded him to help solve a problem with the Corona cam-
    era system in 1963. Another MIT physics student at the time, Robert
Noyce, founded Intel in 1968 with Gordon Moore.
   Wheelon 's work in physics led him indirectly to the CIA. Along the
way, he participated in several of the most pivotal technical enterprises
of the cold war and collaborated with scientists and engineers who,
along with Wheelon, would soon come to play central roles in the cre-
      ation ofstunning new espionage technologies.
   The first project was the 1953-1954 evaluation of America's nascent
missile programs initiated by Trevor Gardner and directed by John von
Neumann of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. As one of
the first employees hired by Simon Ramo and Dean Wooldridge when
they founded the Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation in Southern Califor-
    nia in 1953, Wheelon was assigned to do staff work for the von Neu-
          mann committee. Ramo and Wooldridge were members of the missile
panel. Fresh out of graduate school, Wheelon found himself working
with some of the nation's most illustrious scientists, including George
Kistiakowsky of Harvard and Jerome Wiesner of MIT, both of whom
later served as presidential science advisers.
   "I was in the backroom, the little elf making shoes at night," Wheelon
recalled. "They'd all come in and give me problems to work on and ex-
      pect to have the answers the next morning."
   One of the problems he tackled was missile guidance systems. "I was
basically in the business of trying to develop guidance systems and un-
          derstand what their fundamental physical limitations were," he said.
       A Stradivarius,            Not     a Cracker         Box           335


Missiles were still a novelty. Guidance systems for the Atlas, Thor, and
Titan missiles initially relied on radio and radar signals to direct missiles
to their targets. These ground-based systems were vulnerable to enemy
attack. When Charles Stark Draper from MIT proposed a more reliable
and secure system using gyroscopes and accelerometers, which measure
acceleration, Ramo and Schriever assigned Wheelon to meet with him.
After a day of discussion, Wheelon reported that the Draper plan was
workable and recommended funding the project. Draper soon devel-
       oped the self-contained inertial navigation system that was carried
aboard missiles and was not dependent on ground installations. It be-
      came the primary guidance mechanism for missiles and airplanes until
the introduction of the Global Positioning System satellite network in
the early 1990s.
   At the same time, Wheelon did his own study of the kinematics, or
dynamics, of ballistic missiles in flight to determine how accurately ve-
       locity needed to be controlled to hit distant targets. His paper serves as
one of the basic building blocks of missile engineering to this day.
   After the Russians launched Sputnik I in October 1957, Wheelon was
sent to Washington to help the CIA take a closer look at photographs of
Soviet rockets and missiles collected by the U-2. General Schriever, the
head of the Air Force missile development program, and Allen Dulles
were behind the idea. "I heard that Allen Dulles said let's get some peo-
    ple from our own missile program to come in and look at these pictures
to see if they can make sense out of them," Wheelon recalled. One of
the other men assigned to the project was Carl Duckett, an Army missile
expert who later worked closely with Wheelon at the CIA and played a
central role in developing new spy satellites.
   Wheelon 's next job placed him squarely at the center of one of the
cold war's crowning espionage achievements. The operation, which has
not received the attention it deserves, tapped into the stream of perfor-
        mance data produced by Soviet missiles as they thundered off their
launching pads and streaked downrange on test flights.
  While the U-2 had intermittently been taking pictures of Soviet mis-
    sile test sites, secret American listening posts in Turkey had been col-
            lecting flight data from Russian missile tests. The data, or telemetry, was
                       336        Secret      Empire


transmitted by radio from the missiles to Soviet ground stations. It was
potentially a gold mine of information for anyone trying to understand
how quickly the Russians were advancing in missile technology. Satel-
    lite pictures could show when and where missiles were being fielded, but
not how they performed. Telemetry could supply that information.
   Intelligence specialists, comparing the two sources of information,
like to argue, as they put it, whether "a picture is worth 1000 signals," or
"a signal is worth 1000 pictures." In ideal circumstances, they can work
with both, as well as information provided by informants. In the early
1960s, the CIA got that kind of help from Oleg Penkovsky, a lieutenant
colonel in the Soviet military intelligence service. He gave the United
States a good deal of information about Soviet missiles before he was
unmasked in late 1962 and executed.
   The problem in the late 1950s was that the telemetry data had been
gathering dust in Washington because no one had tried to pry apart the
forty-eight different channels of information and figure out what they
showed. Wheelon's assignment, once again encouraged by General
Schriever, was to unscramble the telemetry. If he succeeded, Washing-
    ton would know almost as much about Soviet missiles as the Kremlin.
  The National Security Agency had started the eavesdropping pro-
       gram, with the assistance of technical experts from Sylvania's Electronic
Defense Laboratories, in the mid-1950s by setting up a listening post
outside the coastal town of Sinop in northern Turkey. The site afforded
a clear line of sight across the Black Sea to the Kapustin Yar missile test
range in the Ukraine that was used to test intermediate-range missiles.
   At first, the effort failed because it relied on receivers designed to pick
up the FM frequencies commonly used by American missiles. Then a
smart young Sylvania mathematician and systems engineer from Stan-
     ford and Perm State, recalling that the Russians had adopted German
rocketry techniques, suggested building receivers tuned to the AM fre-
          quencies that the Germans had used in their rocket programs. As soon
as the change was made, the Russian transmissions came in loud and
clear. Another post was soon opened by the CIA high in the mountains
of northeast Iran, overlooking the Tyuratam range used to test ICBMs.
       A Stradivarius,          Not     a Cracker       Box          337


A third monitoring station was later established by the Agency in west-
    ern China during the Carter administration.
  The Sylvania engineer was William Perry. It was the first of many sig-
          nificant contributions Perry would make to the nation's security as a
prolific creator of new military and intelligence technologies. He and
Wheelon later collaborated on several projects, including the develop-
      ment of an advanced satellite system that collected Soviet missile
telemetry and Russian and Chinese communications traffic. As the
undersecretary of defense for research and engineering in the Carter
administration, Perry launched work on the F-117 stealth fighter, an-
      other Skunk Works airplane, as well as the laser-guided missiles that the
United States used in the 1991 Gulf War, the 1999 air war in Kosovo,
and more recently in the 2001-2002 war in Afghanistan. He served as
defense secretary during Bill Clinton's first term as president. Though
his role as a champion of new technologies is well known in the govern-
       ment, Perry's service to the national intelligence effort has not received
the public recognition it merits.
   The National Security Agency enlisted nongovernment scientists
and engineers to study the telemetry data, including Wheelon and
Perry. The group was called the Telemetry and Beacon Analysis Com-
            mittee, or Tebac. "Nobody had figured out how to use this data,"
Wheelon recalled. It was not encrypted, or scrambled, by the Rus-
    sians— that would come many years later. But it was still hard to differ-
       entiate between the signals to identify different elements of a missile's
performance, like rocket thrust, motor performance, guidance system
operation, engine shut-down, and warhead separation and dispersal.
   It took the group eighteen months during the course of 1958 and
1959 to deconstruct the telemetry. The payoff was worth every hour. As
Wheelon put it, "We'd not only figured out what all the channels were
but also had the calibrations, which meant for almost two decades we
could read Soviet flight data on every shot. Here was a chance to look at
the other poker player's hand."
   Wheelon was brought aboard the CIA in June 1962 to run the Office
of Scientific Intelligence. He quickly discovered that the CIA's scientific
                                338   Secret    Empire


activities, including the development of new spy technologies, were un-
             derfunded and spread out among a jumble of different offices that were
often prevented by security regulations from sharing information.
   As Wheelon was debating whether to stay at the agency in 1963 after
Scoville's departure, Killian and Land, troubled by the patchwork
arrangements and BisselPs use of the U-2 in covert operations like the
Bay of Pigs invasion, were pressing President Kennedy and McCone to
strengthen the CIA's commitment to science. Among other things, they
didn't want high-concept technology systems like the U-2 put at the
service of quixotic escapades like the Bay of Pigs attack.
   Echoing language that Land had used nine years earlier in sternly
urging Allen Dulles to invest in technology and support development of
the U-2, Killian's White House intelligence advisory board recom-
        mended that McCone establish "an administrative arrangement in the
CIA whereby the whole spectrum of modern science and technology
can be brought into contact with major programs and projects of the
Agency." The panel complained that "the present fragmentation and
compartmentation of research and development in CIA severely in-
       hibits this function."
   Faced with the board's recommendations and Wheelon 's demands,
McCone reorganized the Agency to give Wheelon full control of all sci-
        entific work. The new kingdom was called the Directorate of Science
and Technology. It was a troubled realm as Wheelon took charge.
  One of his first headaches was Kelly Johnson's supersonic spy plane.
The project had been a backbreaker for Johnson and the Skunk Works.
"The idea of attaining and staying at Mach 3.2 over long flights was the
toughest job the Skunk Works ever had and the most difficult of my ca-
     reer," Johnson later said.
  Even an apprentice airplane builder could quickly calculate that an
object moving at that velocity — Mach 3.2, or 2,373 mph — would pro-
      duce so much friction that surface temperatures on the leading edges of
the aircraft would soar above 500 degrees Fahrenheit, and top 1,000 de-
       grees in some hot spots around the engines. That might be acceptable
for a few minutes of high-speed flight, but was unsustainable for longer
periods. Aluminum, the customary material used in airframe manufac-
       A Stradivarius,         Not    a Cracker       Box          339


turing, couldn't withstand the heat. The usual lubricants would wilt.
The most advanced aviation fuel, including the special blend made for
the U-2 , would boil off and the cockpit would turn as hot as a home
oven on Thanksgiving.
  Johnson and his colleagues practically had to reinvent the business of
building airplanes to overcome the challenges. He later itemized the
obstacles: "Aircraft operating at those speeds and altitudes would re-
       quire development of special fuels, structural materials, manufacturing
tools and techniques, hydraulic fluid, fuel-tank sealant, paints, plastics,
wiring and connecting plugs, as well as basic aircraft and engine design.
Everything about the aircraft had to be invented. Everything."
   The plane was so novel, Richard Bissell said, "it practically spawned
its own industrial base."
   The Skunk Works crew had gone through one model after another
trying to come up with a workable design. Meeting the speed and alti-
      tude specifications, tough as they were, was not the primary design
problem. The main challenge was reimagining the shape of supersonic
planes to bring down the radar profile.
   Most supersonic planes at the time were bullet-shaped, with tapered
noses that came to a needlelike point. That was essentially the appear-
      ance ofJohnson's initial A-l design and the many that followed it. The
cylindrical portion of the fuselage, however, presented a fat, reflective
target for radar systems. After going through eleven different designs,
Johnson had been stumped by the radar problem.
   Then one of Johnson's designers had an ingenious idea — why not
alter the shape of the fuselage by adding a sloping skirt, or chine, on
both sides of the fuselage? This surface would extend forward from the
wings in the rear all the way to the nose, giving the plane the appearance
of a cobra. The addition of the chine created a tapered, streamlined
shape that reduced the radar cross-section by 90 percent. The A- 12 spy
plane, wryly dubbed the "Oxcart" by the CIA, was born.
   Once the Eisenhower administration had given Lockheed the
go-ahead to build the spy plane in July 1959, Johnson had to solve the
formidable manufacturing problems. "Early in the development stage,"
Johnson later said, "I promised $50 to anyone who could find anything
                        340        Secret     Empire


easy to do. I might as well have offered $1,000 because I still have the

money."
   The use of titanium, which had been pioneered by Bud Wheelon's fa-
      ther, was a case in point. With aluminum out of the picture because of
the scorching heat, Johnson could use stainless steel or titanium as the
primary metal for the plane. Stainless steel was a good high-
temperature material, but after visiting a Lockheed plant in Georgia
that was working with the metal for the supersonic B-70 bomber, he
concluded the sterile conditions needed in manufacturing wouldn't suit
the Skunk Works. "The more complexity, the more potential for prob-
       lems," he said.
   Titanium, which seemed attractive because it was lightweight and
impervious to the kind of heat the A- 1 2 would endure, proved to be no
less demanding. Just getting enough of the scarce alloy to make the
metal for the A- 12 was a challenge. The CIA gave Johnson an assist by
covertly importing titanium alloy from the Soviet Union, which didn't
realize it was ultimately headed for Johnson's airplane factory in Bur-
bank.

   Handling titanium was an airplane maker's nightmare. The metal's
hardness made machining and shaping of parts exceedingly difficult.
Drill bits that sliced through aluminum shattered when they hit tita-
       nium. Yet titanium was also highly sensitive to contaminants. Cad-
             mium-plated tools, for example, couldn't be used because microscopic
pieces of cadmium would interact with the titanium and weaken it.
Johnson had discovered the connection when titanium bolt heads that
had been tightened with cadmium wrenches broke off at high tempera-
      tures. Chlorine was another threat. Ben Rich described the problem:
"We were stunned when spot welds on panels began to fail within six or
seven weeks. Some intensive sleuthing revealed that the panels had been
welded during July and August, when the Burbank water system was
heavily chlorinated to prevent algae growth. The panels had to be
washed after acid treatment, so we immediately began using only dis-
        tilled water."
   By the time Wheelon assumed command of the project in the sum-
     mer of 1963 Johnson had conquered many of the design and fabrication
       A Stradivarius,            Not    a Cracker         Box          341


problems and test flights were under way at the agency's secret airfield
at Groom Lake in Nevada, which had been greatly expanded to accom-
        modate the new plane and the large workforce that supported it.
  However, getting the A- 1 2 to fly safely and reliably at high speed was
another matter. "We have been at Mach 2.5 and as high as 70,000 feet,
but we are in trouble from Mach 2.0 up," Johnson reported in his log on
March 20, 1963. Wheelon found that the project was, as he recalled, "in
trouble, in fundamental trouble."
   Johnson had produced the first prototype in February 1962, nearly a
year behind schedule. Like the U-2, the plane was so secret it couldn't
be flown out of Burbank for fear of being spotted. Unlike the U-2, the
A- 12 was too large to crate up and stow aboard a cargo plane. So, in the
dead of night on February 26, 1962, an enormous trailer truck pulled
out of the Skunk Works complex, headed for the freeway with the disas-
          sembled plane carefully hidden in a massive box. A Lockheed history
matter-of-factly noted that an earlier survey of the route determined
that "some obstructing road signs would have to be removed and select
trees would have to be trimmed." Late-night drivers must have won-
       dered ifthey were hallucinating when they encountered the bizarre car-
      avan proceeding eastward across the California desert that night. The
driver of a Greyhound bus that accidentally grazed the trailer was
handed $3,500 in cash by CIA security officers to settle the matter and
prevent the filing of an accident report.
   The A- 12 took to the air for the first time two months later. The in-
         augural flight, like that of the U-2 seven years earlier, was terrifying for
the pilot and ground crew at Groom Lake. Lou Schalk, the test pilot,
struggled to get the plane under control after it left the ground. He then
overshot the runway, landing on the desert floor. As the plane skittered
across the bone-dry lakebed in a cloud of dust, no one in the control
tower could see if Schalk was going to be able to stop. "Everyone was
having a heart attack," he said later. "I finally made the turn and came
out of the cloud of dust, and they saw I hadn't run into the mountains on
the other side of the lake and blown up the airplane, so there was a big
sigh of relief."
   As the test flights continued, and the fleet of A- 12s at Groom Lake
                        342         Secret      Empire


grew, Johnson discovered that the plane had a potentially fatal flaw. The
flow of air into the massive Pratt & Whitney J58 engines was not ade-
          quately controlled during the upper ranges of supersonic flight. As a re-
     sult, engines would stall or blow out. The sudden loss of power at such
high speeds made the plane shudder violently, cracking the heads of pi-
     lots against the cockpit glass. Fearing the airplane was breaking up, sev-
     eral pilots bailed out at this point during test flights, and one was killed
when his parachute failed to open.
   The problem was traced to the retractable inlet cones mounted in
front of the engines. These spikes were designed to regulate the flow of
air onto the engine fan blades. The hydraulic control units selected by
Johnson couldn't adjust quickly enough at high speeds to manage the
supersonic air flow. The slightest change in the angle of the air stream,
which was pouring into the inlets at 100,000 cubic feet per second at top
speed, could deflect it from the optimum point of contact with the fan
blades, extinguishing the engine. The defect crippled high-speed flight
testing. As 1964 came to a close, there were eleven A- 12 planes at
Groom Lake. Though they had logged more than twelve hundred
flights totaling nearly seventeen hundred hours of flying time, the fleet
had managed to accumulate a grand total of just thirty- three minutes of
flying time at Mach 3.2, the advertised cruising speed for the airplane.
   For a while, Johnson stubbornly resisted Wheelon's suggestion to
switch to an electronic spike control system that could adjust the air
flow more quickly and precisely. "Kelly had many wonderful features,
but he didn't feel comfortable with electronics," Wheelon said. "He
understood that whole damned airplane. He understood the aero-
           dynamics, the structures, the components. The only thing he didn't
understand was electronics."
   Johnson finally yielded in 1964 when Wheelon threatened to cancel
the program unless the change was made. It took more than a year of
fine-tuning by Ben Rich to come up with a system that worked. "Devel-
       oping this air-inlet control system was the most exhausting, difficult,
and nerve-racking work of my professional life," he said. On January 27,
1965, an A- 12 took off from Groom Lake and traveled for an hour and
fifteen minutes at Mach 3.1.
       A Stradivarius,           Not     a Cracker        Box          343


  The A- 12 was a remarkable aircraft, but its operating days were num-
        bered. President Eisenhower's ban on spy flights over the Soviet Union
after the downing of the U-2 on May 1, 1960, was not lifted by his suc-
          cessors, and the A- 12 never flew over Soviet territory. The CIA used the
plane sparingly over North Korea and during the Vietnam War to
gather intelligence on North Vietnam, then retired its fleet in 1968 be-
      cause ofthe high cost of operating the aircraft. The Air Force made fre-
        quent use of its two-seat model of the plane, the SR-71, during the
Vietnam conflict and in a variety of trouble spots during the 1980s, then
mothballed its fleet in 1990 for the same reason. Some of the planes are
now parked at aviation museums around the country. Even in repose,
the black, streamlined machines are an impressive sight and even now
appear to be the creation of some future civilization. The SR-7 1 "Black-
       bird" still holds the speed record for many long-distance flights, includ-
    ing New York to London — one hour, fifty- four minutes, and fifty-seven
seconds, which is more than one hour faster than the Concorde super-
     sonic airliner. The Blackbird's flying time from Los Angeles to Wash-
        ington was sixty-eight minutes, seventeen seconds, or about as long as
many Washington commuters spend on the beltway most mornings
going to work.
  While Wheelon and Johnson were coaxing the A- 12 into opera-
    tion— at one point Wheelon infuriated McCone by recklessly going
along on a test flight aboard a two-seat version of the plane used for pilot
training — Wheelon was trying to look over the horizon at future satel-
    lite systems. The exercise stemmed, in part, from Corona's limits.
Corona, in reconnaissance parlance, was a broad area search system,
meaning it supplied photographic coverage of large bands of Soviet ter-
      ritory. Itallowed photo analysts to identify new airfields, missile bases,
shipyards, and other sizable military sites, but couldn't offer a closer
look at smaller targets. A different kind of photoreconnaissance satel-
     lite, known as a spotting system, was needed to produce high-resolution
pictures of Russian missiles, airplanes, ships, submarines, tanks, and
other objects.
   The Air Force, unable to produce useful pictures from the Samos
satellites, had embarked on an effort to develop a spotting system that
                       344        Secret     Empire


returned exposed film to the earth in a capsule, like Corona. The project
was code-named Gambit. The first Gambit satellite was launched in
July 1963. The new system nicely complemented Corona, producing
detailed pictures in which analysts could see an object as small as 18
inches in size. That was comparable to the U-2 and at least three times
more detailed than anything Corona could show.
  Since the Air Force was using Gambit primarily to refine targeting
plans in the event of war, and photo interpreters could not make out im-
         portant Soviet facilities in the Corona photographs, Wheelon wanted a
satellite with improved resolution that could be used to gather informa-
       tion about new Soviet weapons, industrial installations, nuclear test
grounds, and other matters of keen interest to policymakers. In October
1963, he selected Sid Drell to direct a satellite study. The group's man-
      date was to determine whether Corona could be improved enough to
serve as a spotting system as well as a search system or whether a new
satellite was required.
   Drell, by this point, had already helped Wheelon diagnose and fix a
serious problem in the Corona camera system that had flummoxed
technical experts from Itek, the Leghorn company that supplied the
Corona cameras. Film was coming back from space blotted with white
streaks. With the assistance of several other high-powered physicists,
including Luis Alvarez from the University of California at Berkeley,
who would win the Nobel Prize in physics in 1968, DrelPs panel found
that the rollers that fed the film through the camera were producing an
electrical discharge that streaked the film. The problem was eventually
remedied by making the rollers out of a different material.
   The Drell committee, the Satellite Photography Working Group,
advised Wheelon that the resolution of the Corona camera system
couldn't be improved significantly. "They said the whole scheme had
pretty well reached its natural limit and that if we were going to do bet-
    ter than Corona, we really needed to start again." Wheelon agreed, and
set out to develop a new satellite, later code-named Hexagon, that
would provide broad area coverage at higher resolution.
  The plan generated months of skirmishing with the National Recon-
         naissance Office and its new director, Brockway McMillan, an MIT
       A Stradivarius,            Not    a Cracker        Box           345

mathematician and former Bell Laboratories executive who wanted to

take over the CIA's satellite programs.
   There had been bad blood between Wheelon and McMillan before
they got to Washington. As a prepublication reviewer of papers submit-
    ted to Physical Review, a scholarly journal for physicists, McMillan had
rejected an article by Wheelon about radio waves. Wheelon felt the as-
          sessment was unfair and uninformed. He complained to the editor, who
overruled McMillan and published the paper. Once ensconced in Wash-
        ington, the two men were propelled into conflict by institutional rivalry,
personal animosity, and the core struggle over whether the CIA should
remain a major player in the rapidly expanding, and increasingly pivotal,
world of spy satellites.
  The bureaucratic warfare over control of satellites was unusually fe-
             rocious, even by Washington's cutthroat standards. In the early rounds,
Wheelon and McMillan were the leading combatants, but as the con-
      flict played out over the years many top officials were drawn into the
fray. The fighting in the early 1960s shredded an agreement about the
role of the NRO that McCone and Roswell L. Gilpatric, the deputy sec-
         retary ofdefense, signed on May 2, 1962, and even defied a peacemak-
     ing effort by President Kennedy in 1963. Kennedy invited Wheelon
and McMillan to the White House to discuss the tensions, but failed to
win their cooperation.
   Decades later, McMillan still bristled when asked about Wheelon. "I
didn't trust his technical judgment," he said. It was one of his milder
comments — he asked that the others not be quoted. In retrospect,
McMillan said, he regretted that he had let his views about Wheelon
color his management of the NRO and relations with the CIA. But he
defended his record as director of the NRO. "My job was to produce in-
           telligence and plan for future systems and that's what I tried to do."
   The memos that Wheelon and McMillan wrote during the mid-
1960s were so heated they were still smoldering in the archives more
than three decades later when they were unclassified.
  The main disagreement at first centered around McMillan's effort to
take over the Corona program after a series of failed missions in
1962-1963. "I feel that it is essential for me to establish a single point of
                      346        Secret      Empire


authority within the NRO     for the Corona program, to which I can then
assign full responsibility for the successful conduct of the program,"
McMillan notified the directors of Program A and Program B in late
1963.
  Wheelon fired back in a memo to McCone, protesting that a reas-
         signment ofCorona would not solve the technical problems. Rather
than yielding control to the NRO and Air Force, Wheelon said, "More
vigorous CIA participation on the technical and programmatic front is

required."
  A month later, after reviewing the Corona program, Wheelon ad-
      vised McCone that the CIA was "at a turning point in the NRO and
there is no honorable way to lose this one. If we agree to the Corona
transfer, I predict we will never re-enter the satellite field in a meaning-
   ful way."
  Wheelon acidly noted that the McMillan plan "would substitute or-
           thodox Air Force procurement procedures for those of the CIA at the
critical contractors. Of course, his proposal is enormously pleasing to
the uniformed Air Force, as it completes their monopoly of all satellite

programs."
  In late June 1964, with no cease-fire in sight, McMillan declared in a
memo, "It is my considered judgment that the Corona project will never
operate reliably and responsibly, and will never uniformly achieve the
quality of which it is known to be capable, as long as the Government's
management of it is as diffuse as it now is."
   The dispute over Corona seemed to be headed toward resolution in
January 1965 with the drafting of a secret Memorandum of Agreement.
Under the accord, Wheelon and the CIA largely retained control.
McMillan, unhappy with the terms negotiated by his aides, declined to
sign the agreement.
   In March the conflict escalated when McMillan peremptorily can-
      celed the planned launch of a Corona satellite from Vandenberg. The
action infuriated Wheelon and his aides. They prepared a memo to
Gen. Marshall Carter, the deputy director of the CIA, that opened by
saying, "Dr. McMillan's willful cancellation of the Corona Mission
1018 launch on 23 March 1965 culminates a series of actions dating
       A Stradivarius,         Not    a Cracker       Box         341


back to the early days of the NRO to force the Agency either out of the
satellite reconnaissance business or submit its activities to the desires
and control of the Air Force."
   The Corona dispute was finally quieted in the summer of 1965 after
McMillan was dismissed as NRO director. Thanks to the intervention
of Cyrus Vance, the deputy secretary of defense, and Adm. William F.
Raborn, who had succeeded McCone earlier that year, the CIA and
Pentagon reached agreement on the respective responsibilities of the
CIA and NRO. It awarded the CIA most of the powers it had been fight-
   ing to retain.
   Frictions persisted, however, impeding development of new satel-
      lites. Hexagon, for instance, was stalled for several years. Wheelon got
final approval from the Johnson administration to move ahead with the
project in April 1966, five months before he left the CIA. The program
was later informally dubbed "Big Bird" because of the satellite's size —
40 feet long, 10 feet in diameter, and weighing 15 tons.
   Hexagon realized Wheelon 's ambition for a high-resolution search
system, though it was not ready for service until June 1971, five years
after he left the CIA. The two powerful cameras aboard the satellite
could cover a far wider area of the Soviet Union with each orbit than
Corona while taking pictures almost as detailed as those produced by
Gambit. It also carried four return capsules, extending the operational
life of the satellite to several months.
   For Wheelon, the planning for Hexagon was just the beginning of
the technical leap he yearned to make.
   One Sunday afternoon in the fall of 1963 he had a brainstorm as he
sat in his living room in northern Virginia. "I was watching an NFL
game on television that was being played in San Francisco. It suddenly
struck me that if I could do that, the technology was finally ready to view
the earth's surface from orbit and to observe the scene as it was being re-
        ceived inthe spacecraft."
   Instant images from space — it was the Holy Grail of spy technology.
Men Davies and his RAND colleagues had first proposed the idea in
Project Feed Back in 1954. The Air Force had expended millions of dol-
     lars trying to build a video-relay system — Project Samos — but had
                        348        Secret      Empire


failed to produce a satellite that could match Corona in picture resolu-
      tion. Now Bud Wheelon was setting his sights on the same elusive goal,
known in the spy business as near real-time intelligence.
   The day after watching the San Francisco 49ers game, Wheelon re-
        turned to work and called Leslie Dirks, one of the brightest scientists in
the CIA research shop. Dirks had studied physics at MIT and Oxford,
where he was a Rhodes Scholar. He had joined the Agency in 1961, a
year before Wheelon.
   Wheelon described his epiphany to Dirks, then told him, "You're de-
         tached from all other duties. I'll give you whatever money you need and
let's get started on figuring how we can build a readout system that re-
     ally makes sense."
   Broadcasting a pro football game across the country was one thing,
taking and televising high-resolution pictures from 100 miles out in
space was quite another, as the Air Force had learned to its dismay. Even
though television technology was advancing rapidly, the airing of the
football game offered only the most rudimentary model of what
Wheelon would need for a spy satellite. The television cameras used at
Kezar Stadium in San Francisco that Sunday afternoon converted the
optical image of the action on the field into electrical signals, which
were then transmitted across the country. That was a start. But they did
so with electronic equipment that could never produce the kind of high-
resolution images expected from a spy satellite. If Wheelon and Dirks
were to make any headway, they would need a different and far more
precise way of converting light into electrons.
   By chance, not far away in New Jersey, two scientists at Bell Labora-
      tories were hard at work on a new technology that would, among other
things, solve the problem. Their research would not only make it pos-
       sible to create the satellite that Wheelon imagined but also play a cen-
     tral role in changing the way images and information were recorded
and transmitted. William S. Boyle and George E. Smith, working with
silicon semiconductors, were inventing charge-coupled devices, or
CCDs.
  The devices are basically extremely sensitive photo sensors that turn
light into a stream of electronic signals that can be recorded and dis-
       A Stradivarius,          Not    a Cracker       Box         349


played on a computer monitor or television screen. The more familiar
term for the resulting technology is digital imaging.
   The work of Boyle and Smith had the potential to make film obsolete.
CCDs convert light energy into tiny electric charges that can be stored,
measured exactly, and converted into numbers representing shades of
color that can be transmitted and used to reassemble the images. CCDs
are employed today in all sorts of familiar civilian and military technolo-
      gies, including video cameras, digital cameras, high-definition televi-
      sion, medical imaging machines, and the Hubble space telescope.
   Wheelon learned about the research from William O. Baker, the
head of Bell Labs and an influential adviser on scientific and intelligence
matters to numerous presidents, including Eisenhower and Kennedy.
Though the lab did not publicly disclose its work on CCDs until 1970,
Baker informed Wheelon about Boyle and Smith's progress in 1963.
"Baker said we usually don't let technology out until it's pretty well
proven, but for this purpose we'll let you have it," Wheelon recalled.
"So we got a handful of CCDs from Bell Labs and started the quest."
   It lasted more than a decade, and turned into one of the most ambi-
      tious technological projects the government has ever attempted. "It was
a huge technical challenge, like going to the moon," said Jimmie D.
Hill, who worked on the program and served for many years as the
deputy director of the National Reconnaissance Office. As with the
Corona program in the late 1950s, the CIA and the companies it hired
to work on the new satellite had to invent new technologies as they pro-
         ceeded. The CIA was trying to compress the development time for
major new electronic technologies that were just starting to emerge in
the 1960s and 1970s.

   "You're pushing it faster than industry at the time was heading," Sid
Drell said.
  The grand idea of matching up CCDs with a high-definition optical
system to create an electro-optical satellite was compelling, but the dif-
        ficulties were enormous. As Drell, an accomplished violinist, aptly put
it, "It's not just a cracker box, it's a Stradivarius."
    The CCDs first had to be perfected and then assembled in large ar-
       rays to ensure good contrast and picture quality. The scientists wanted
                        350        Secret      Empire


to measure light rays practically one atomic particle at a time, and they
had to create a system that could produce a crisp signal from just a few
photons, the basic unit of light, while suppressing other ambient energy
sources that could clutter the image. The electronic circuitry involved
was exquisitely intricate. New telescopic lenses had to be fashioned,
using a complex system of mirrors to increase the focal length, the key
to obtaining highly magnified images. The optical system, in turn, had
to be married to the sensors.
   Getting the optical data back to earth was no small challenge. The
data had to be moved out of the satellite as fast as it was recorded so it
would reach Washington nearly instantaneously and also not overload
the limited capacity of onboard storage devices. Transmitting it directly
to ground stations, however, would not be possible while the satellite
was flying over Soviet territory, far beyond the range of American re-
         ceivers. The only solution was to create a fleet of relay satellites that
acted like an electronic bucket brigade, conveying the data across the
heavens and down to a ground station outside Washington.
   Moving large volumes of digital information through the relay sys-
      tem and processing it in Washington required groundbreaking
telecommunications research. Sophisticated new electronic machines
were needed to reconstruct the images from the digitized data and make
them available to analysts so they could be enlarged and examined in
minute detail. The list of challenges grew to epic proportions — and ex-
       pense. And everything had to be done in secret.
   Wheelon got the project started, then turned it over to his successor,
Carl Duckett, who in turn handed it off to his successor, Les Dirks.
Over the years, dozens of American aerospace and electronics compa-
     nies developed components, with Lockheed serving as the prime con-
         tractor. Westinghouse Electric Company did much of the work refining
the CCDs.
   Despite its importance, the project was not immune to the feuding
between the CIA and NRO. If anything, its novelty made it more vul-
       nerable to attack. The Air Force doubted the new system could be per-
        fected and pressed hard during Richard Nixon's first term as president
       A Stradivarius,         Not    a Cracker       Box         351


for its own new spy satellite project, an incremental improvement of
Gambit. As the Pentagon, led by Defense Secretary Melvin Laird, mar-
       shaled resources to lobby for the Air Force plan in 1971, Edwin Land's
CIA advisory panel on technology took the case for the electro-optical
system directly to the White House.
  Sid Drell and Richard Garwin, an eminent IBM physicist and long-
     time Land panel member, made an appointment to see Henry Kissinger,
Nixon's national security adviser. With help from Carl Duckett, they
prepared briefing materials. "Sid and I carefully drafted a top-secret
code-word handwritten letter that was personally delivered to Kissinger
at what seems to have been the last possible moment to obtain a favor-
     able decision for the electro-optical system," Garwin recalled. To en-
      sure secrecy, Garwin and Drell met with Kissinger in the secure
Situation Room in the White House basement.
   Land, meantime, discussed the project with Nixon directly, arguing
that the novel technology offered a chance to radically improve the state
of reconnaissance satellites. The White House approved the CIA plan
in the spring of 1971. The underlying science, by then, seemed firmly
within reach and the Agency felt it was ready to proceed with construc-
      tion of the satellite and its support systems. The satellite, variously
called Kennan, Crystal, and the KH-1 1, was launched on December 19,
1976. The first pictures were presented to Jimmy Carter on January 21,
1977, the day after his inauguration. In remarkable detail, they showed
his inaugural ceremony.
   Two years later, in one of the most serious security breaches of the
cold war, William Kampiles, a disgruntled CIA employee, sold a copy of
the top-secret technical manual for the satellite to Soviet agents for
$3,000. Transfer of the manual, for which Kampiles was convicted and
sentenced to a forty-year prison term, gave the Russians more than
enough information about the spying powers of the satellite to take eva-
    sive action by disguising new weapons systems and trying to shield them
from sight. Still, despite the compromising of the satellite system, it re-
        turned priceless intelligence about the Soviet Union for years, and
today advanced models provide Washington with pictures of North Ko-
                         352         Secret       Empire


rean missile sites, Iranian nuclear reactors, Iraqi military and industrial
complexes, terrorist training camps, and an infinite variety of other po-
       tential threats.

   Wheelon's last big project — creation of a new kind of satellite to in-
                 tercept missile telemetry and long-distance telephone communica-
      tions— began with the same sort of serendipitous moment that gave rise
to the electro-optical system. Wheelon, as was his custom, arrived at the
CIA early one morning in July 1963 . As he read the New York Herald Tri-
        bune, he spotted a story about a new communications satellite sponsored
jointly by NASA and the Pentagon, the first of its kind. The satellite had
been placed in orbit more than 22,000 miles out in space, far beyond the
low, elliptical orbits favored for photoreconnaissance satellites. The
orbit was so high it allowed the satellite, called Syncom II, to revolve in
tandem with the earth — it was traveling around the planet at the same
rate that the earth was revolving around its axis, thus staying over the
same spot on earth. In that stable position, called a geosynchronous
orbit, it could serve as a relay point for telephone calls and other com-
               munications traffic, eliminating the need for undersea cables. Engineers
at Hughes Aircraft, which built the satellite, had solved a number of
tricky problems that made it difficult to keep a satellite in stationary
orbit.
  Wheelon realized that the geosynchronous orbit could provide great
advantages in trying to pick off telemetry and communications signals
as they flashed through space. "I said, Whoa!, that's got something to do
with what we're doing. If we could sit up there, stationary in space, and
listen, we could probably solve a lot of problems."
   In theory, a satellite in the proper geostationary orbit hovering over
the equator in the vicinity of the Soviet Union and China could harvest
the telemetry from Russian missiles fired from all the Soviet test sites,
supplementing the information gathered by the listening posts in
Turkey and Iran. A satellite would have the added advantage of being
able to monitor telemetry produced during the final phase of flight over
eastern Siberia. This last stage of flight included reentry through the at-
            mosphere. The powered phase of flight as a missile lifts off and climbs
through the atmosphere, and the final phase, as the warhead descends,
       A Stradivarius,           Not    a Cracker       Box          353


are the most critical for telemetry gathering. American ground stations
in Japan and on Shemya Island near the tip of the Aleutian archipelago
collected telemetry as the warheads neared the Soviet target zone on the
Kamchatka Peninsula.
  A geosynchronous satellite would also be able to pick up Russian and
Chinese radio and telephone communications and cable traffic, espe-
        cially military communications that were not then encrypted.
   Wheelon called together the members of his signals intelligence
brain trust and asked them to examine the feasibility of developing such
a satellite. He also asked Bill Perry to take a look. Perry by this time had
founded his own research firm, Electronic Systems Laboratory in San
Jose.
   A satellite in high orbit would have the advantage of hovering indefi-
       nitely over an area, and picking up signals from a much wider region,
but it would have to be equipped with exceedingly sophisticated signal
processing equipment to extract the readable telemetry from the back-
        ground noise, including TV signals that traveled far into space. It would
also require a mammoth dish antenna and a large new ground station,
most likely in Australia. "We were talking about signal processing far
ahead of anything that was being done at the time," Perry recalled.
   Nevertheless, after studying the matter, Perry advised Wheelon that
the technological barriers could be overcome. Wheelon picked Lloyd
K. Lauderdale, a Naval Academy graduate on his staff who had a Ph.D.
in electrical engineering from Johns Hopkins, to manage the project. It
was code-named Rhyolite.
   It, too, became a hostage of the Washington infighting between the
CIA and NRO, and the first model was not put in orbit until June 1969.
It performed brilliantly, giving Washington a flood of new data about
Soviet missiles and an abundant supply of intercepted communications.
It was as though the CIA had implanted a giant bugging device in
Moscow that could monitor many of the Soviet Union's most sensitive
military communications. Unfortunately, like the electro-optical sys-
     tem afew years later, the satellite system was soon betrayed.
   In this instance, the secrets of the spacecraft were sold to the Russians
in 1975-1976 by a clerk at TRW            (the expanded version of Ramo-
                           354         Secret       Empire


Wooldridge), the company that built the satellite and helped operate it.
The clerk, Christopher John Boyce, worked in the "Black Vault" at
TRW's headquarters outside Los Angeles. Much of the intelligence
traffic from the new satellites passed through the heavily secured facility
on its way to Washington from the ground station in Pine Gap, Aus-
       tralia, that had been specially constructed for the new satellite. With en-
                       couragement from a friend, Andrew Daulton Lee, Boyce started selling
information about the satellite to Russian agents in Mexico City and Vi-
      enna. The exchanges continued for twenty-one months. The two were
caught in 1977, convicted and sentenced to long prison terms. Their be-
      trayal was the subject of The Falcon and the Snowman, Robert Lindsey's
1979 bestseller.
   With information about Rhyolite, the Russians moved to encrypt
their telemetry and switch their most sensitive military communications
to land lines as rapidly as they could. Despite these efforts, Rhyolite
continued to pick up a staggering volume of valuable information and
relay it on to Washington.
  In fact, as all these systems came into operation, and even more ad-
        vanced models were added in the 1980s and 1990s, the problem in
Washington was no longer collecting information but making use of it.
The trickle of intelligence about the Soviet Union that frustrated
Dwight Eisenhower when he moved into the White House at mid-
century had turned, by the end of the century, into a tidal wave of infor-
        mation that threatened to engulf Washington and overwhelm the ability
of analysts to identify the most urgent and important intelligence and
then make sense of it. At the same time, the expense and energy that
went into building and operating these fabulously ingenious technical
systems drained resources from the more mundane but indispensable
business of training intelligence officers and sending them abroad to re-
      cruit informants, penetrate hostile governments or terrorist networks,
and gather the kind of critical information that even the most sophisti-
      cated satellites could not find. Information, for example, about Osama
bin Laden 's plan to attack New York and Washington on September 1 1 ,
2001.
   No one understood these dangers better than Bud Wheelon, the man
       A Stradivarius,         Not   a Cracker       Box         355


who set Washington on course to develop ever more powerful espi-
       onage technologies. Sitting in his meticulously organized home office
outside Santa Barbara late one afternoon in August 1998, he talked
about the unintended impact of spy satellites on the CIA's clandestine
service, which manages thousands of spies around the world. "You're
getting these wonderful pictures and intercepts, and you don't have to
take as many chances, lose as many people, take as many risks," he said.
   Asked what kind of information spy satellites are unable to provide
about America's new enemies, such as terrorists, he replied, "Oh, every-
      thing that you want to know, like where they are headed, what they are
going to do, and when they are going to pull the trigger."
                               EPILOGUE




        Losing the Inventive Spark

The       unintended consequences and limitations of an intelli-
              gence empire built around spy satellites was clearly evident long
before September 11, 2001, and the realization that the United States
faced a lethal new threat at home from Islamic terrorists. Weaknesses in

the nation's intelligence agencies had been mounting for years, and
some of the problems could be traced to policies and budgets that de-
       voted adisproportionate share of resources to technical collection sys-
      tems like satellites while neglecting more prosaic espionage methods
like the use of human agents. For more than four decades, Richard
Leghorn's vision of strategic reconnaissance and the overhead spy sys-
      tems itspawned had served the nation brilliantly, but by the mid-1990s
it was apparent that other forms of intelligence gathering needed atten-
      tion. Itwas also increasingly evident that the remarkable spy machines
of the cold war — and the institutions that had been created in Washing-
     ton to process and analyze the intelligence data that they produced —
were not versatile or agile enough to cope with the array of new threats
the country confronted.
   The Clinton administration discovered some of these realities on May
11,1 998. As Bill Clinton's top national security aides reported to work in
Washington early that Monday morning, they received startling and dis-
          turbing news: India had detonated several nuclear weapons at an under-
         ground test site 350 miles southwest of New Delhi. The explosions at the
Pokharan test range in Rajasthan state signaled the opening of a new,
highly dangerous nuclear arms race in South Asia between India and Pa-
       kistan, bitter enemies that had fought three wars since 1947 when the

                                      356
                           Epilogue             357


two became independent states. With India openly brandishing a nu-
     clear arsenal — it had tested an atomic bomb in 1974 but subsequently
left unclear whether it was building a stockpile of weapons — Pakistan
was sure to lift the restraints on its own nuclear program and test its first
bomb within a matter of days. The Indian action was a devastating blow
to American-led international efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear
weapons. What made the test especially infuriating to officials in Wash-
         ington was that they learned about it on CNN. America's intelligence
services, relying on an armada of sophisticated spy satellites, provided no
advance warning, eliminating any chance Washington might have had to
intervene diplomatically to head off the test.
  Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, the Clinton administra-
      tion's point man for India and Pakistan, had just arrived at his elegantly
furnished seventh-floor office at the State Department on May 1 1 when
he heard about the test from the department's operations center. He im-
           mediately called the CIA on a secure line to get more information. He
was astounded to find that the Agency wasn't even aware there had been
a test. "I told them," Talbott later recalled. "They didn't know!"
   The intelligence failure was stunning. Nearly forty years after
launching the first successful photoreconnaissance satellite, and better
than two decades after creating remarkably powerful intelligence-
gathering systems that could see the license plate, though not the
license number, on a car from hundreds of miles out in space and relay
the images back to Washington almost instantaneously, the United
States had somehow missed visual signs that the Indians were making
final preparations for an explosion at Pokharan. These activities in-
        cluded the laying of large cables from monitoring equipment on the
surface to the entrance to the shaft drilled deep into the earth where the
nuclear weapons were placed. Having relied on reconnaissance satellites
for many years to observe the primary Soviet testing ground near Semi-
palatinsk in Kazakhstan, intelligence analysts in Washington were fa-
        miliar with the preparatory work that usually preceded an underground
blast. The Indians followed a similar routine.
  In fact, thanks to satellite pictures, the CIA had detected just such
signs at the Indian site in late 1995. In hopes of preventing an explosion,
                            358         Epilogue


Frank Wisner Jr., the U.S. ambassador to India, had quietly met with
one of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao's top aides in New Delhi in De-
         cember 1995 to appeal for restraint. To make plain that Washington
knew precisely what was happening at Pokharan, Wisner came to the
meeting armed with a revealing photograph of the test range taken by
one of Washington's most advanced spy satellites. He unveiled it briefly
during the conversation. The Indians refrained from testing, though
Wisner and his colleagues back in Washington could not be sure
whether his intervention was the cause or whether the Rao government
had hesitated for other reasons or had been bluffing all along.
   Strobe Talbott had no opportunity to appeal to the Indians two and a
half years later. One reason was that the Indians, learning from the 1995
episode, had gone to great lengths to conceal work at the testing com-
      plex. Because the orbital path of all military and civilian satellites must
be registered with the United Nations under a 1975 agreement, the In-
      dians could calculate when one of America's KH-1 1 near real-time im-
       agery satellites would pass over the desert area at Pokharan. During
those brief periods, which came two or three times a day, preparations
had apparently been suspended. Other work had been camouflaged.
   But Indian subterfuge was not the only explanation. As the Clinton
administration investigated why it had received no warning, it found
fundamental weaknesses in the government's entire intelligence-
gathering apparatus, some of them linked to its reliance on spy satellites
and the analytical operations established to exploit the river of informa-
    tion streaming in from space every day. The findings were sobering: Spy
satellites produced far more raw information than the government's
battalion of overworked analysts could handle. The CIA relied so heav-
    ily on satellites and other high-tech devices to gather information over-
        seas that it had failed to cultivate informants in places like India, where
human spies were essential to learning about secret military plans. Top
intelligence officials, wedded to long-standing assumptions about for-
      eign threats to American security, were slow to recognize new dangers
and to redirect technical systems like spy satellites to monitor them. So
much effort was going into making satellite data available to military
                            Epilogue             359


forces to correct intelligence deficiencies found during the Gulf War in
1991 that some areas critical to policymakers were being neglected.
   The organizational and operational disabilities identified in 1998
have a direct bearing on how well the nation can defend itself today
against terrorist organizations and other foreign threats. Retired Adm.
David E. Jeremiah, a former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
who was brought in by the Clinton administration to determine what
had gone wrong before the Indian test, reported among other things
that spy technologies had outpaced the ability of the government to ex-
      ploit the advanced systems.
  "We have an imbalance today," he said, "between the human skills as-
       sociated with reading photography, looking at reports, understanding
what goes on in a nation, and the ability to technically collect that infor-
        mation. Ineveryday language, that means there is an awful lot of stuff on
the cutting-room floor at the end of the day that we have not seen."
   As for gathering information on the ground — old-fashioned spying
by trained officers who know how to build networks of local infor-
      mants— Admiral Jeremiah offered a short but withering assessment: "I
think that generally across the board, without being specific to India, we
could say our human intelligence capacity is seriously limited."
   In reconstructing the intelligence record prior to the Indian test, Ad-
      miral Jeremiah found that despite the concealment efforts at Pokharan,
there had been visual evidence that should have tipped off Washington.
Unfortunately, only one analyst had been regularly assigned to review
satellite imagery of the test site. That meant some initial preparations
had been missed, including the arrival of several bulldozers near the test
site on Friday, May 8. At 3 a.m. the following Monday in Washington,
just hours before the test, the latest satellite pictures were transmitted to
Washington. The lone analyst on duty that night who was responsible
for checking on the Indian site noted that fences around the test area
were being removed, a good indication that a test was imminent, but the
photo interpreter did not raise the alarm in Washington. Four or five
hours passed before more experienced intelligence officers got to work.
By then the Indian government had announced that it had tested three
                           360        Epilogue


nuclear devices. When a team of ten photo interpreters went over the
entire photographic record retrospectively for Admiral Jeremiah, they
identified a good deal of activity in the days before May 1 1 pointing to-
      ward atest.
   Admiral Jeremiah also faulted intelligence officials for failing to seri-
       ously consider the possibility that the new Indian government, led by
the head of a Hindu nationalist party that had openly championed the
development of nuclear weapons, was more likely to conduct a test than
previous governments dominated by the more moderate Congress
party. After aspiring for fifty years to gain power, the Hindu nationalists,
led by Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, had made no secret of their
desire to demonstrate that India was a great power militarily and politi-
      cally, even if that risked frictions with the United States.
   But instead of devoting additional espionage resources to the Indian
nuclear program after the installation of the Vajpayee government in
March 1998, intelligence officials, like the rest of the Clinton adminis-
         tration, accepted misleading assurances from the Indian leadership that
it was not rushing to test nuclear arms. The assumption in Washington
was that the Hindu nationalists, anxious to increase trade with the
United States, had little interest in provoking a crisis by testing nuclear
weapons. After Pakistan provocatively tested a new intermediate-range
missile in early April that could reach India's largest cities, the Imagery
Requirements Subcommittee, an interagency group that controls the
movements of American spy satellites, directed that attention be fo-
      cused on Indian missile ranges. As a result, the Pokharan test site was
photographed just once every three days or so. The White House and
CIA ordered no new review of India's nuclear program, and the fleet of
American spy satellites in operation at the time, including two advanced
KH-1 1 photoreconnaissance systems and two Lacrosse radar satellites,
was not redirected in May to look more frequently at the Pokharan
complex as test preparations proceeded.
   The problems identified by Admiral Jeremiah were not unique to the
Indian test. They are chronic ailments that played a role in the govern-
       ment's failure to detect and prevent the terror attacks in New York and
Washington on September 1 1, 2001. They still impede American espi-
                             Epilogue              361


onage operations today. Ironically, the extraordinary advances in spying
technology that began nearly fifty years ago under the direction of
Dwight Eisenhower contributed over time to distortions in the nation's
intelligence agencies, including an overreliance on dazzling machines
and a shortage of resources in more traditional fields like the recruit-
      ment and training of spies. By a cruel coincidence of history, it is these
very failings that make American intelligence agencies ill prepared to
track and thwart terrorist groups and have forced President George W.
Bush to order the overhaul of the CIA and other agencies so they can
more effectively deal with terrorist threats.
   Until September 11, 2001, American spy agencies were still largely
creatures of the cold war, designed to collect intelligence about static es-
          pionage targets like Soviet airfields, missile bases, shipyards, and easily
identifiable military activities such as the movement of tank divisions
and fuel tankers. High-flying spy planes and sophisticated spy satellites,
when properly utilized, were ideal instruments for monitoring the So-
    viet Union and its allies, verifying compliance with arms control agree-
          ments, and warning the United States if hostile military forces were
being readied for war. But the spy machinery of the cold war — and the
lumbering government institutions that were built to operate and main-
     tain it— are not well matched to the task of gathering intelligence about
terrorist groups.
  Terrorists are everything Soviet military forces were not: invisible,
elusive, improvisational, and cunningly creative. Spy satellites can pro-
      vide pictures of their training camps and intercept their communica-
        tions ifthey are careless about the telephone systems they use, but
satellites cannot supply the kind of round-the-clock surveillance that is
required to detect unfolding plots, and they offer no help in recruiting
sources inside terror cells. These are jobs that can only be performed by
seasoned spies who have studied the languages, customs, and opera-
      tional practices of groups like Al Qaeda and have cultivated allies within
the intelligence services of countries like Pakistan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia,
and Israel that are more knowledgeable about Islamic terrorist organi-
         zations. Such spies, known as case officers at the CIA, are in short sup-
     ply in the Agency's clandestine service after years of insufficient
                            362        Epilogue


investment in human spying. Over the years, the high cost of building
spy satellites, and the tendency to see them as a magic potion that would
solve most intelligence problems, led Washington to neglect other as-
      pects ofthe spy game. Richard Bissell had anticipated just such a danger
years earlier as he was coaxing the new technologies into operation. In a
prophetic 1959 letter to a CIA colleague who had helped manage the
development of the U-2, Bissell worried that "the company," as he re-
      ferred to the Agency, would lose interest in the taxing discipline of de-
          veloping new informants. "There is no way to start accomplishing what
we want except by establishing contacts with people," he wrote. "To be
sure, this is a very old way of doing business, lacking the glamour of
modern technology and requiring a lot of dull hard work. Nevertheless,
there is no substitute for it as an approach." The CIA, which began up-
          grading its anti terrorist capabilities before the 2001 attacks on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon, will be scrambling for years to
assemble the army of expert field agents and covert operatives that the
country must have if it is to dismantle terror networks and prevent fur-
     ther attacks.
   In July 2002, a congressional subcommittee spotlighted some of the
CIA's weaknesses in a report about the intelligence failures preceding
the attacks of September 11, 2001. The Subcommittee on Terrorism
and Homeland Security of the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence reported: "Because of the perceived reduction in the threat
environment in the early to mid-1990s, and the concomitant reduction
in resources for basic human intelligence collection, there were fewer
operations officers, fewer stations, fewer agents, and fewer intelligence
reports produced. This likely gave the CIA fewer opportunities for ac-
        cessing agents useful in the counterterrorism campaign and eroded
overall capabilities."
   Spy satellites can make an important contribution in tracking new
threats — if government leaders deal smartly with problems that under-
      mine the effective use of the space-based collection systems. As Admiral
Jeremiah discovered, there are not enough experienced photo inter-
          preters on hand to look closely at all the images that need to be exam-
      ined. There will never be enough analysts to keep up with the flood of
                             Epilogue              363


images collected daily by spy satellites — the volume is just too great. But
the government lacks a sufficient number simply to inspect top-priority
images in a timely manner, including anything that might shed light on
terrorist plots and the development of nuclear, biological, and chemical
weapons abroad.
   The same is true for translators dealing with the even greater volume
of communication intercepts that are swept up by American eavesdrop-
      ping satellites. Before September 11, 2001, the National Security
Agency, which handles the intercepts, did not have nearly enough Ara-
    bic speakers to process message traffic from the Middle East and Cen-
      tral Asia. Several conversations picked up from Afghanistan on
September 10, 2001, that alluded in a general way to a major terror at-
      tack the next day, were not given immediate attention and were not
translated until September 12. They did not identify the time, place, or
suicidal nature of the attacks, but someday there may be more informa-
     tive intercepts that could save lives if translated immediately.
   The number of photo interpreters employed by the government's
main national imagery analysis center was slashed by 50 percent during
the 1990s, eliminating hundreds of jobs as intelligence budgets were cut
in the expectation that the end of the cold war would reduce foreign
threats to the United States. The government's photo interpretation
operations were also reorganized in 1996 in a wrenching consolidation
that merged the CIA's proudly independent National Photographic In-
              terpretation Center — the creation of Arthur Lundahl — with a variety of
Pentagon analytical shops and the Defense Mapping Agency.
   The new organization, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency
(NIMA), was placed under Pentagon control. Many veteran CIA photo
analysts, fearing that the Pentagon takeover would put a premium on
producing tactical intelligence reports for the military services, retired
as NIMA was being formed. The expertise vacuum created by their de-
        parture has yet to be filled, though by 2001 the recruitment and training
of new photo interpreters had brought staffing back up to the level
reached in 1989, before the budget reductions commenced. The
agency, which has offices scattered around the Washington and St.
Louis metropolitan areas, employs roughly fifteen thousand people,
                           364         Epilogue


evenly divided between government workers and private contractors.
Several thousand of them are photo analysts.
   Even so, NIMA is straining to meet the ever-increasing demand for
imagery intelligence from policymakers and military commanders. The
two customer bases have very different needs. The president, secretary
of state, and other top officials work primarily with what Washington
calls national intelligence information. That is raw data and analytical
reports dealing with international matters such as China's nuclear arms,
North Korea's ballistic missiles, Russia's nuclear assistance to Iran, ten-
      sions between India and Pakistan, and the worldwide threat presented
by terrorist groups like Al Qaeda. While the Pentagon's civilian leader-
     ship isalso interested in these issues, the military services need tactical
military information that can be used to plan and wage wars — or what is
known in the capital as combat support intelligence. With the advent of
cruise missiles, laser-guided munitions, and other sophisticated
weapons systems that depend on satellite data for precise targeting and
guidance, the Pentagon cannot operate effectively without a constant
stream of imagery intelligence, including highly detailed maps of unfa-
      miliar war zones like Afghanistan that are based on satellite pictures.
   In recent years, combat support needs have sometimes drained atten-
     tion from national intelligence requirements. That is understandable in
wartime, when American forces must have access to the latest satellite
images to ensure their own safety and to hit enemy targets as accurately
as possible. But when it comes to fighting terrorist groups like Al Qaeda,
distinctions between intelligence functions can disappear. For example,
the latest information about a terrorist group can be as important to an
Army special forces officer calling in air strikes in the mountains of
Afghanistan as it is to White House and Pentagon officials directing the
overall war against terrorism. But ever since Gen. Norman Schwarz-
      kopf angrily complained during the Gulf War that imagery intelligence
was not reaching his field commanders quickly enough to be of use on
the battlefield, Washington has devoted so much attention to fixing that
problem that other vital uses for satellite data have sometimes been
shortchanged.
  The uneven results are readily apparent. Great progress has been
                             Epilogue             365


made in giving military forces instant access to intelligence information
from airborne and space-based reconnaissance systems. This required
some simple changes such as lowering the classification level of imagery
so military officers without special security clearances could view it,
and some difficult technical steps such as compressing the data stream
so it could be more easily transmitted to mobile units in remote loca-
       tions. The fusion of intelligence information with combat operations
helped produce the quick victories over Taliban and Al Qaeda forces in
Afghanistan in 2001 and 2002.
  Meantime, NIMA, which should be brimming with state-of-the-art
computers designed for examining digital imagery, limps along with
outmoded equipment. As of 2002, only 15 percent of the satellite pic-
     tures transmitted to Washington were called up on computer terminals
and examined by photo interpreters using the latest software for en-
        hancing and enlarging the images. The rest of the digital images had to
be transformed into conventional black-and-white photographs that
were then studied with magnifying equipment using the same basic
technology that was available when Bud Wheelon ordered Les Dirks to
start work on an instant imaging system in 1963. Some photo inter-
        preters prefer working with film — for one thing, they can keep it handy
instead of going through a cumbersome process to get digital images
transferred from a central tape bank to a computer station. Still, it was as
though the government had developed a sleek, beautifully engineered
racing car and then hitched it to an ox to haul it around the track. It was
only after the terror attacks in 2001 that the Bush administration and
Congress acted to equip NIMA with enough computer work stations to
remedy the imbalance. By 2004, the agency expects that 85 percent of
its photo interpretation work will be done with computers.
  Even NIMA's belated modernization program may soon prove insuf-
           ficient because the number of imagery satellites is expected to grow rap-
    idly in mid-decade with the launch of a new generation of smaller, less
expensive photoreconnaissance and radar-imaging systems. This pro-
           gram, labeled Future Imagery Architecture (FIA) by its sponsor, the
National Reconnaissance Office, was devised in the 1990s to supple-
      ment and eventually supplant the KH-1 1 program.
                             366         Epilogue


  The impulse was not simply to replace an aging program that had
served the nation for a quarter century but also to deal with a techno-
         logical paradox created by the mammoth KH-11 satellites that are
equipped with both optical and infrared sensing systems. They were, in
effect, too much of a good thing. The powerful satellites were so large
and expensive — more than $1 billion apiece — that the government
never operated more than two or three at a time, limiting coverage of
the globe. And if the replacement for a retiring KH-11 was lost on
launch because of a rocket failure, months might pass before another
satellite was built and ready to be placed in orbit, hindering Washing-
     ton's intelligence gathering.
  The heavy investment in these systems also left insufficient money in
the intelligence budget to produce new broad-area search systems like
the KH-9, or Hexagon, that could provide a look at out-of-the-way
places and large swaths of remote territory that high-resolution systems
could not adequately watch, even after the newest KH-11 models,
called Improved Crystal, were outfitted with some broad-search capa-
         bilities. The last Hexagon satellite stopped working in 1984. Though
search satellites lack the kind of eye-popping detail produced by the
KH-ll's high-resolution optics, they can show terror training camps,
weapons development centers, and other sites that might alert the
United States to developing threats. Panoramic pictures are also essen-
    tial to the Pentagon in preparing for military operations in areas like
Afghanistan, where battle planners need to scan hundreds of square
miles of territory at one time so they can identify enemy positions, lo-
     cate airfields and potential landing zones, plot the movement of Ameri-
     can aircraft and ground troops, and mark civilian settlements and
refugee camps so they will not be accidentally attacked. Maps based on
such photographs are critically important to combat pilots when oper-
      ating over unfamiliar terrain.
   The Future Imagery Architecture program, which at an estimated
cost of more than $4 billion is the most expensive spy project in the
nation's history, will give Washington a much larger fleet of reconnais-
       sance satellites. Instead of four or five large imagery satellites in orbit at
any time, there will be nearly a dozen smaller photo and radar-imaging
                             Epilogue              367


satellites. In theory, that should provide more continuous and compre-
           hensive coverage of the earth's surface, allowing Washington to moni-
     tor trouble spots without the prolonged blackout periods that are
common now as photo interpreters wait for satellites to make another
pass over a particular place. The more compact satellites, which are
being built by Boeing with the assistance of dozens of subcontractors,
will sacrifice some resolution in the interest of obtaining more extensive
coverage. The Raytheon Systems Company is developing a new net-
      work of ground stations to handle the new satellites and the data they
generate.
   For now, the government's answer to the shortage of panoramic im-
      ages is to buy pictures taken by privately operated systems like the
Ikonos satellite put in orbit in 1999 by Space Imaging, Incorporated, a
Colorado company. The company sells much of its imagery to the gov-
             ernment, which retains the right to exercise "shutter control" over pri-
      vate American satellite operators during wartime by ordering them to
give Washington sole access to pictures of potentially sensitive locations
like Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq.
  When the Pentagon turned to Space Imaging for help after Septem-
    ber 11, 2001, however, taking advantage of Washington's "shutter con-
         trol" powers turned out to be a lot more complicated than the Clinton
administration had anticipated in the mid-1990s, revealing another un-
                foreseen flaw in the spy satellite empire. The company was not the
problem — it was content to sell the Pentagon all its images of
Afghanistan and Pakistan. But when technicians at Space Imaging's
headquarters outside Denver tried to transmit the digital images to
NIMA in Washington on high-speed commercial lines, they discovered
the agency couldn't handle the data stream. Though NIMA's electronic
systems were compatible with the government's spy satellites, they
lacked the bandwidth to receive the data from Space Imaging. The
company improvised by copying the images on CD-ROMs and ship-
     ping them overnight to Washington, but they then sat unused for sev-
    eral weeks in the imagery library at Boiling Air Force Base. Because of
the delay, American pilots had to rely on Russian maps of Afghanistan
and other outdated sources during the first weeks of the war.
                            368        Epilogue


  As Washington regroups to deal with terrorist threats and abandons
its historic reluctance to use military force preemptively to protect the
nation from potential attack, the dream of intelligence planners is to cre-
    ate a constellation of space and airborne reconnaissance systems that is
better designed than the present one to gather information about terror
groups. In the word of one NIMA official, these new systems, working
together, would provide a "God's-eye view" of the world — the ability to
look anywhere, anytime. Or to put it in more technical terms, the goal is
to move from periodic reconnaissance to constant surveillance.
   For now, omnipresent surveillance is beyond the nation's reach,
though the government has taken some strides toward that goal in re-
     cent years with the development of unmanned, remote-controlled spy
planes like the Predator and Global Hawk. The Predator made its oper-
          ational debut in a limited role during the air war over Kosovo in 1999,
then moved to center stage in the war in Afghanistan, where it gave the
CIA and military commanders a remarkably clear view of ground action
as it unfolded. The Predator, which was developed for the CIA by Gen-
      eral Atomics Aeronautical Systems, and the Global Hawk, produced for
the Air Force by Northrop Grumman, can hover for many hours over
one location — something reconnaissance satellites cannot do — or per-
     form a variety of other surveillance jobs, like following a caravan of ve-
         hicles as it crosses the desert or mountains. Thanks to some creative
engineering touches encouraged by the CIA, the Predator can be armed
with Hellfire air- to surface missiles. On November 3, 2002, a missile
fired from a Predator killed a suspected Al Qaeda leader as he was trav-
      eling bycar through a remote area of Yemen.
   Unhappily, advances in spy technology like the Predator and Global
Hawk have been more the exception than the rule in recent years. In-
      deed, the nation is still working mostly with technologies that were first
developed during the 1950s and refined in the 1960s and 1970s. That is
a tribute to the extraordinary advances that were made then, and a testa-
       ment to the absence of comparable innovation in the years since. Given
the deadening weight of large governmental and business institutions
and the political and financial penalties associated with projects that
take time to perfect, it is an open question whether government, indus-
                             Epilogue              369


try, and the academic community can rekindle the kind of creative part-
          nerships that flourished in earlier years. In the 1990s, universities and
new technology companies, often working in tandem, acted as engines
of innovation in America, leaving government agencies like the CIA and
NSA struggling to keep up with rapid advances in information tech-
          nologies, including computing, encryption, data processing, and
telecommunications.
  There are plenty of people at the White House, Pentagon, CIA,
NRO, NSA, and NTMA talking about the urgent need for a new burst of
innovation to produce technologies tailored to collecting intelligence
on terror networks and tracking the proliferation of chemical, biologi-
    cal, and nuclear weapons. Nearly every spy agency now has a depart-
       ment devoted to looking over the horizon at new ideas. After September
1 1, 2001, they all got an infusion of money to fund research and devel-
          opment projects. There may be ways, for example, to spin off new sur-
            veillance technologies from the rapid advances in semiconductors and
microcircuitry produced by companies in Silicon Valley and other high-
tech centers.

   It won't be easy to shed the bad habits that developed in the closing
years of the last century when the science and technology shop at the
CIA, once the flywheel of innovation in the spy business, lost its inven-
     tive spark, the NRO was beset with management problems, and a series
of presidents relegated their science advisers to back offices where they
were rarely seen or heard. It is hard to imagine people like Jim Killian or
Edwin Land being given license today to visit the Oval Office at any
time to draw the president's attention to daring technological projects
germinating in the private sector that the Pentagon and other govern-
      ment organizations are reluctant to pursue. There is a tendency now, as
Jimmie Hill, the former deputy director of the NRO, said, "to exagger-
    ate the capabilities and underestimate the cost" of new overhead recon-
                naissance systems. Robert Gates, the director of central intelligence
during the presidency of George H. W. Bush, worried even before Sep-
        tember1,
              1 2001, about "a bureaucratic chase for the money" that stunts
the imaginative work needed to make technological advances in the in-
                telligence business.
                          370        Epilogue


   Not long after the attacks of September 1 1, 2001, the CIA quietly in-
      vited Bud Wheelon and other surviving pioneers of the cold war spy
technologies to return to Washington for a few days to advise the
Agency on how it might recapture the creative spirit of an earlier era and
apply it to a dangerous new world. It is not an idle matter to wonder
whether the United States, as it mobilizes to confront some of the
gravest threats it has ever faced, will again see the likes of the inventors
and risk-takers who revolutionized spying, opened the gateway to space,
and helped safeguard the nation during the most perilous years of the
cold war.
                                    NOTES




                                 Abbreviations

The following abbreviations are used throughout the notes:
AW: Aviation Week & Space Technology
CU: Columbia University Oral History Research Office
DDEL: Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library

         AW: Ann Whitman Files (Eisenhower's Papers as President of the
              United States)
         WHCF:    White House Central Files
         NSC: White House Office Files, Office of the Special Assistant for
              National Security Affairs, NSC Series
         OCB: White House Office Files, Office of the Special Assistant for
              National Security Affairs, OCB Series
         SA: White House Office Files, Office of the Special Assistant for
               National Security Affairs, Special Assistant Series
         OSS: White House Office Files, Office of the Special Assistant for
               National Security Affairs, Office of the Staff Secretary Series,
               1952-1961
NARA: National Archives and Records Administration
NRO: National Reconnaissance Office
NYT: The New York Times

                                    Epigraph

 vii "Corona: A Triumph of Technology," address at a symposium titled "Piercing
     the Curtain: Corona and the Revolution in Intelligence," sponsored by the
     CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, at George Washington University,
     Washington, D.C., May 23, 1995.

              Chapter 1 : "Racing Toward Catastrophe"
  4 chilling, cold war calculus: R. Cargill Hall, "The Truth About Overflights," Quar-
          terly Journal of Military History, Spring 1997, p. 32.

                                        371
                               372          Notes


 5 kept a tight rein: Andrew Goodpaster interview, Nov. 2, 1999.
 5 authority to declare war: At a 1959 meeting of the National Security Council,
   Eisenhower expressed his concern about approving more U-2 flights. Accord-
        ing to notes prepared by his son, John S. D. Eisenhower, "Nothing, he says,
   would make him request authority to declare war more quickly than violation
   of our airspace by Soviet aircraft. He stated that while one or two flights might
   possibly be permissible, he is against an extensive program." Memorandum for
   the Record, Feb. 12, 1959. DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Sub-
   series, Box 15, Intelligence Matters (8).
 8 ineffectual performance: Hall, "The Truth About Overflights," p. 34.
 9 broke off pursuit: The Soviet military provided MiG pilots with no more fuel
   than was necessary for a mission, a system designed to discourage the pilots
   from defecting with their planes.
10 air battle: Harold R. Austin, "A Cold War Overflight of the USSR," Daedalus
   Flyer, Spring 1995, p. 17.
11 Born in the seaside city: http://www.spacecom.af.mil/hqafspc/history/gardner
   .htm

1 2 "bastard": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New York: Harper &
    Row, 1986), p. 73.
1 2 received a highly secret report: Ibid. , p. 7 3 .
12 They examined: A.J. Wohlstetter et al., Vulnerability of U.S. Strategic Air Power to
    a Surprise Enemy Attack in 1956, SM-15 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp.,
    1953).
1 3 Gardner was so alarmed: Beschloss, Mayday, p. 7 3 .
1 3 "the true story": Ibid., pp. 73-74.
14 "racing toward catastrophe": Robert H. Ferrell, ed., The Eisenhower Diaries (New
    York: W. W. Norton, 1981), p. 262.
14 John Herseys harrowing account: John Hersey, "Hiroshima," New Yorker, Aug.
   31,1946.
15 "I see nothing": Dwight D. Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe (New York: Double-
    day, 1948), pp. 459-469.
1 5 "This common purpose ": Dwight D. Eisenhower, "Chance for Peace," speech be-
         fore the American Society of Newspaper Editors, Apr. 16, 1953.
16 "equating security with territory": John Lewis Gaddis, We Know Now: Rethinking
   Cold War History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), p. 15.
16 the speech was alarming: David McCullough, Truman (New York: Simon &
   Schuster, 1992), p. 486.
1 7 "a political force ": George Kennan, "The Long Telegram," in Foreign Relations of
    the United States, 1946, vol. 6: Eastern Europe, The Soviet Union, Department of
    State Publication 8470 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
   1969), pp. 696-709.
19 Lilienthalflew: McCullough, Truman, pp. 747-748.
19 Truman feared: Ibid., p. 775.
20 Ramenskoye airfield: Gregory W Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA,
                                    Notes               313


   and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
   of Intelligence, 1998), p. 20.
20 The new aircraft: John Prados, The Soviet Estimate: U.S. Intelligence Analysis and
   Russian Military Strength (New York: Dial Press, 1982), p. 40.
2 1 'We saw a flash ": Andrei Sakharov, Memoirs (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1 990),
    p. 174.
2 1 smaller and lighter: The reduction in weight and size without a loss of explosive
   power is accomplished by, in effect, supercharging the weapons. This tech-
                nique, called boosting, increases the explosive yield of an initial fission reaction
   that, in turn, helps power the fusion reaction. A hydrogen bomb is composed of
   two main parts, a small fission bomb, known as the primary stage, and a fusion
   bomb, called the secondary stage. The primary stage explodes first. The energy
   release and resulting high temperature drive together the light nuclei in the
   secondary stage, initiating a fusion reaction. Boosting is done by injecting a
   mixture of tritium and deuterium gas into the plutonium in the primary assem-
        bly. In the resulting atomic stew, the splitting of the plutonium atoms heats the
   tritium and deuterium mixture to the point where their atoms start fusing. The
   fusion, in turn, amplifies the fission by bombarding the plutonium atoms with
   an additional stream of high-energy neutrons. It is the equivalent of throwing
   kerosene on a fire. The boost in energy released by the primary assembly spikes
   the power of the secondary assembly.
22 Strategic Missile Evaluation Committee: George B. Kistiakowsky, A Scientist in the
   White House (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976), p. xxxiii.
23 Moscow's efforts: Prados, The Soviet Estimate, pp. 52-53; K. E. Tsiolkovsky, "Re-
          active Flying Machines," in Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the
   History of the U.S. Civil Space Program, ed. John M. Logsdon (Washington,
   D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1995), p. 59.
23 German engineers: Prados, The Soviet Estimate, p. 58; William E. Burrows, Deep
   Black: Space Espionage and National Security (New York: Random House, 1 986),
   p. 66.
23 over Kapustin Yar: Hall, "The Truth About Overflights," p. 33; Paul Lashmar,
   Spy Flights of the Cold War (London: Sutton Publishing, 1996), p. 79.
24 "just appalling": NYT, Sept. 12, 1995, p. C-l.
24 "extraordinary absence of knowledge": Richard Helms interview, Nov. 2, 1999.
24 Most were shot down: Burrows, Deep Black, p. 62.
25 Battle of the Bulge: Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell, eds.,
   Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites (Washington, D.C.: Smith-
            sonian Institution Press, 1998), p. 173.
25 "We have no plan": Peter Grose, Gentleman Spy: The Life of Allen Dulles (New
   York: Houghton Mifflin, 1994), p. 352; Emmett Hughes, Ordeal of Power (New
   York: Atheneum, 1963), p. 101.
25 "no accurate prediction": Dwight D. Eisenhower, remarks to cabinet on Fiscal
   Year 1954 budget. DDEL, WHCF, Confidential File, Box 45, National Secu-
       rity (1).
                                  374          Notes


26 clear superiority: See, for example, National Intelligence Estimate 1 1-4-54, "So-
         viet Capabilities and Probable Courses of Action Through Mid-1959," Aug.
   28, 1954. DDEL, NSC, Subject Subseries, Box 10, NIE 1 1-4-54 (2).
26 "The problem of defense"": Victor McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of
   Edwin Land (Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 282.
27 "haunted": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 74.
27 "Surprise attack has a capacity": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
   1953-56: Mandate for Change (New York: Doubleday, 1963), p. 5 16.
27 single 10-megaton bomb: "The Report to the President by the Technological Ca-
              pabilities Panel of the Science Advisory Committee," Feb. 14, 1955, DDEL,

        3.
28 "ap.cross of iron": Dwight D. Eisenhower, "Chance for Peace," speech before the
   American Society of Newspaper Editors, Apr. 16, 1953.
28 "We must know accurately": Albert D. Wheelon, "Corona: The First Reconnais-
         sance Satellites," Physics Today, Feb. 1997, p. 24.
29 "Eisenhower directed the discussion": James R. Killian Jr., Sputnik, Scientists and
   Eisenhower (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977), p. 68.
29 "highly unsatisfactory": Grose, Gentleman Spy, p. 403.
29 awaiting presidential action: R. Cargill Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance
   and the Genesis of Project Corona," in Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth,
   the First NRO Reconnaissance Eye in Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald (Bethesda,
   Md.: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997),

    p. 35.
30 Closer to home: NYT, Washington Post, May 7-9, 1954.
30 "The new craft is believed": NYT, May 6, 1954.
30 fallout shelters: Margot A. Henriksen, Dr. Strangeloves America: Society and Cul-
         ture in the Atomic Age (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p. 95.
3 1 Prosperity was spreading: Historical Statistics of the United States (Washington,
    D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975).
3 1 ambivalent mood: Henriksen, Dr. Strangeloves America, p. 113.
3 1 the first scheme: F. H. Clauser, "Preliminary Design of an Experimental World-
    Circling Spaceship," SM-11827 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., May 2,
    1946).
32 nearly insurmountable: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 62.
32 work with Alfred Hitchcock: McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible, p. 294.
34 "an enormous floodlight": NYT, Sept. 12, 1995.

        Chapter 2: The Origins of Strategic Intelligence
35 sobering scene: Richard S. Leghorn interview, Dec. 2, 1999.
3 5 more controlled circumstances: Leghorn interview; Donald E. Welzenbach, un-
                  published manuscript, 1999, with permission of the author; "Operation Cross-
           roads Fact Sheet," U.S. Naval Historical Center, http://www.history.navy
    .mil/faqs/faq76- 1 .htm.
                                    Notes              375


36 "for the good of mankind": Jack Niedenthal, "A Short History of the People of
    Bikini Atoll," http://www.bikiniatoll.com.
3 7 "awesome and frightful": R. Cargill Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance and
    the Genesis of Project Corona," in Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth, the First
    NRO Reconnaissance Eye in Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald (Bethesda, Md.:
    American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997), pp. 27-28.
38 presented them in Boston: Richard S. Leghorn, "Objectives for Research and De-
                     velopment inMilitary Aerial Reconnaissance," Dec. 13, 1946, in Selected Read-
         ings in Aerial Reconnaissance: A Reissue of a Collection of Papers from 1946 and
   1948, ed. Amrom H. Katz, P-2762 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., 1963).
39 Fearing the loss: Leghorn interview, Welzenbach manuscript; Hall, "Post War
   Strategic Reconnaissance," p. 29.
40 traditional spying methods: R. Cargill Hall, "Strategic Reconnaissance in the
   Cold War," Prologue, Summer 1996, p. 107.
40 bold ideas and a fine eye: George W. Goddard, with DeWitt S. Copp, Overview: A
   Lifelong Adventure in Aerial Photography (New York: Doubleday, 1969); Dik
    Daso, "Origins of Airpower: Hap Arnold's Early Career in Aviation Technol-
         ogy, 1903-1935," Airpower Journal, Winter 1996; Daso, "Origins of Airpower:
    Hap Arnold's Command Years and Aviation Technology, 1936-1945," Air-
          power Journal, Fall 1997.
42 "rough and unpleasant": Goddard, Overview, p. 1 1 .
42 "Ifyou could fly high enough": Ibid., pp. 245-246.
43 Mees told Goddard: Ibid., p. 273; Welzenbach manuscript.
43 from the Boston area: Welzenbach manuscript.
44 "didn't bat an eye": Goddard, Overview, p. 275.
44 incongruous but productive: Ibid., p. 276.
45 Leghorn tested: Leghorn interview; Welzenbach manuscript.
45 The most creative minds: Welzenbach manuscript.
47 no exact accounting: Ibid.
47 "Americans were dying": Richard S. Leghorn interview, May 30, 2000.
48 flummox Soviet radar: Richard S. Leghorn, "Aerial Reconnaissance: A paper
   presented to the Reconnaissance Symposium [Topeka Air Force Base], Friday,
   Dec. 3, 1948," in Katz, Selected Readings in Aerial Reconnaissance, pp. 6-12.
48 underlined the need: Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris, RAND s Role in the
    Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Related U.S. Space Tech-
            nology, R-3692 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., 1988), pp. 35-39.
49 "first real attempt": Harold F. Wienberg interview, June 4, 2 000.
49 Canberra PR3: Leghorn interview, Dec. 2 , 1 999; Dick Van der Aart, Aerial Espi-
               onage: Secret Intelligence Flights by East and West (New York: Arco/Prentice Hall
   Press, 1984), p. 18.
49 customized reconnaissance model: Gregory W Pedlow and Donald E. Welzen-
              bach, The CIA and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Cen-
        ter for the Study of Intelligence, 1998), pp. 4-7.
49 "pioneering in aviation": Wienberg interview, Oct. 18, 2000.
                                376         Notes


49 conventional thinking: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 6;
   Leghorn interview, May 30, 2000.
50 Truman first approved: R. Cargill Hall, "The Truth About Overflights," Quar-
       terly Journal of Military History, Spring 1997, p. 28.
5 1 "real visionary ": Wienberg interview.
52 "/ had the good fortune ": Bernard A. Schriever interview, Nov. 1 , 1 999.
5 2 "/ don V want ever again ": Thomas A. Sturm, The USAF Scientific Advisory Board:
    Its First Twenty Years, 1944-1964 (Washington, D.C.: USAF Historical Divi-
          sion Liaison Office, 1967), pp. 2-5.
54 "difficult to believe": Memorandum for General Craigie, Colonel Schriever,
   Sept. 4, 1952, NARA Record Group 341, Entry 10, Box 13, 360.6 Intelligence
   and Reconnaissance.
54 distinguished consultants: R. Cargill Hall, "Strategic Reconnaissance in the Cold
   War," Prologue, Summer 1996, p. 115.
55 "a period in history": "Problems of Air Force Intelligence and Reconnaissance,"
   Beacon Hill Report, Project Lincoln, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
   June 15, 1952, Personal Papers of Richard Leghorn, pp. 163-164.
55 "turbojet-powered": Ibid., p. 167.
55 one of the top five objectives: Richard S. Leghorn, "Development Planning Objec-
         tives for Intelligence and Reconnaissance: An Interim Report," June 18, 1952,
   Personal Papers of Richard Leghorn, pp. 13-14 and 18.

               Chapter 3 : Stargazing in Santa Monica

58 "unprecedented use": The RAND       Corporation: 40th Year (Santa Monica, Calif.:
   RAND Corp., 1988), p. 3.
58 "vigorous research and development": Rip Bulkeley, The Sputniks Crisis and Early
   United States Space Policy (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), p. 2 1 .
58 blocks from the beach: Merton E. Davies interview, Aug. 24, 1998.
59 Rockets through Space: Davies interview; Jeffrey T Richelson, Americas Secret
   Eyes in Space (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1990), p. 1.
61 moved to RAND: RAND was fully detached from Douglas in 1948 and turned
   into an independent, nonprofit corporation that for many years served primar-
       ily as a high-powered Air Force think tank.
61 minimal advances: F. H. Clauser et al., Preliminary Design of an Experimental
    World-Circling Spaceship, SM-1 1827 (Santa Monica, Calif: The RAND           Corp.,
    1946).

62 "inflame the imagination ": Ibid., p. 2 .
62 "observation aircraft": Ibid., p. 10.
63 "consternation and admiration ".-James E. Lipp et al., Reference Papers Relating to a
   Satellite Study, RA-15032 (Santa Monica, Calif: RAND Corp., 1947), in
   RANDs Role in the Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Re-
          lated U.S. Space Technology, ed. Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris,
   R-3692-RC (Santa Monica, Calif: RAND Corp., 1988), pp. 16-17.
                                 Notes            377


63 geosynchronous orbit: Arthur C. Clarke, Voices from the Sky: Previews of the Coming
    Space Age (New York: Harper & Row, 1965).
63 feasible but impractical: Davies and Harris, RANDs Role, p. 1 7; Richelson, Amer-
         icas Secret Eyes in Space, p. 4.
64 three primary benchmarks: Richelson, Americas Secret Eyes in Space, p. 5.
66 ''ridiculous": Davies and Harris, RANDs Role, p. 28.
66 no longer seemed implausible: Ibid., pp. 27-30.
67 "impossible for any nation to hide": Wernher Von Braun, "Crossing the Last
   Frontier," Colliers, Mar. 22, 1952, in Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents
   in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program, ed. John M. Logsdon (Washing-
         ton, D.C.: NASA, 1995), p. 180.
67 "valuable dbservation post": A. V. Grosse, "Report on the Present Status of the
   Satellite Problem," Aug. 25, 1953. DDEL, NASA Papers, Box 1, "Present Sta-
        tus of Satellite Program, 1953," p. 5.
67 took no further action: "Satellite Programs," DDEL.
68 UI scolded Dick ": Davies interview.
69 "Airfields of all sizes": James E. Lipp and R. M. Salter, eds., Project Feed Back Sum-
          mary Report, R-262 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., March 1, 1954), p. 5.
70 "Soviet sovereignty": Ibid., p. 146.

                             Chapter 4: Seeing Air

73 "I read other books": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie Smith, Kelly:
   More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
   Press, 1989), p. 7.
74 studying aerodynamics: Ibid., pp. 10-15.
74 Johnson was a natural: Ibid., p. 16.
74 return in a year: Ibid., pp. 19-21.
75 Johnson cheekily announced: Ibid., p. 2 1 .
75 triple tail design: Ibid., pp. 23-24.
75 "hell scared out of me ": Ibid., p. 2 8.
76 Skunk Works: The Skunk Works was named after the work of a character in the
   comic strip "Li'l Abner."
76 143 days:]obmon, Kelly, pp. 97-99.
76 "comical ducks waddle": Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works (New York:
   Little, Brown, 1994), pp. 107-108.
76 "That damned Swede": Ibid, p. 1 14.
77 18 percent too large: Ibid, p. 108.
77 "the old man was right": James Plummer interview, Sept. 2, 1998.
77 "walk up to the blackboard": Ibid.
77 "towering personality ": Albert Wheelon interview, Aug. 27,1 998 .
77 adapting the B-51: Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
   and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
   of Intelligence, 1998, p. 8.
                                   378          Notes


78 bypassed Lockheed: Ibid., pp. 8-9 and 2 1-22.
79 "until about I960": Ibid., pp. 9-10; Jay Miller, Lockheed U-2 (Austin, Tex.: Aero-
   fax, 1983).
79 "maximum possible altitude ": Jay Miller, Lockheed Martin s Skunk Works (Leices-
       ter, Eng.: Midland Publishing, 1995), p. 73.
80 new blend ofjet fuel: Ibid., p. 72.
80 subsonic jet-powered glider: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 47;
   Rich, Skunk Works, p. 125.
81 "coffin corner": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 76.
83 wasting his time: Ibid., p. 12; Harold Wienberg interview, June 4, 2000.
83 "Bissellwas immediately impressed": R. Cargill Hall, "Post War Strategic Recon-
              naissance and the Genesis of Project Corona," in Corona: Between the Sun and
   the Earth, the First NRO Reconnaissance Eye in Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald
   (Bethesda, Md.: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
   1997), p. 38.
83 "turned down our proposal": Miller, Skunk Works, p. 74.


       Chapter 5: "I Think I Have the Plane You Are After"
84 fly sailplanes: Donald E. Welzenbach interview, May 2002.
85 "I have the plane": Gregory W Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
   and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
   of Intelligence, 1998), p. 30.
85 invited Killian: James R. Killian Jr., Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower: A Memoir
   of the First Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (Cambridge,
   Mass.: MIT Press, 1977), pp. 67-68.
8 7 "felt an obligation ": Ibid . , p . 86 .
87 "he was peerless": http://www.harvardsquarelibrary.org/unitarians/killian.html
87 "addict ofH. L. Mencken": James R. Killian Jr., The Education of a College Presi-
           dent, AMemoir (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985), p. 1 .
88   " 'intellectual tax' ": NYT, Nov. 8, 1957, p. 10.
89   "greatest possible freedom": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 59.
89   " 'that's wonderfuV ": Andrew Goodpaster interview, Nov. 2, 1999.
90   "take instruction from nobody": Ibid.
90   "not help themselves": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 241 .
90   "Vm so grateful": Victor McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin
     Land (Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 301.
90 "ready access to . . . Eisenhower": Killian, The Education of a College President,
    p. 455.
90 "imagination, creative powers": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 89.
9 1 "interdisciplinary congeniality ": Killian, The Education of a College President, p. 45 5 .
92 "an authentic genius": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 87.
92 "of immense consequence ": Ibid .
92 "In meetings with presidents": Void.                                                     <
                                Notes             379


92 "a genius and a showman ": Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell,
   eds., Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites (Washington, D.C.:
   Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998), p. 187.
92 "spellbinding": Albert Wheelon interview, Aug. 27, 1998.
92 "values of science": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 88.
93 Their second child, Edwin: McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible, pp. 13-14.
93 intersection of science and business: Ibid., p. 19.
94 "orthogonal thinking": Ibid., p. 35.
94 Lands first patent: Ibid., pp. 42-49.
96 Alfred Hitchcock: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 29.
96 "personal laboratory": Donald E. Welzenbach, "Din Land: Patriot from Po-
            laroid," Optics & Photonics News, Oct. 1994, p. 24.
97 "exuded confidence and intelligence ": Sidney Drell interview, Nov. 13,1 998 .
97 "loved the black world": Richard S. Leghorn interview, Dec. 2, 1999.
97 "knew more secrets": McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible, p. 328.
97 "Everybody respected him ": John McMahon interview, Nov. 12,1 999.
98 "avoid wasting our resources": Report of the Technological Capabilities Panel,
   vol. l,p.25,DDEL.
 99 "attack might strike us": Ibid., vol. 2, p. 136.
 99 "answers instead of assumptions": Ibid., vol. 1 , p. 26.
100 proposed by Lockheed: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 30-31.
100 Henry Yutzy: Ibid., p. 3 1.
101 "a guilty conscience ": Welzenbach, "Din Land," p. 2 5 .
101 national interest compelled: Ibid.
103 "didn H want his role": Andrew Goodpaster interview, Jan. 1 8, 2001 .
103 behind-the-scenes: Fred I. Greenstein, The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as
    Leader (New York: Basic Books, 1982).
103 "find and photograph": Donald E. Welzenbach, "Science and Technology: Ori-
         gins of a Directorate," Studies in Intelligence 30 (Summer 1986): 19.
103 "an unconventional way ": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 82 .
103 "could scarcely have been worse": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
    1956-61: Waging Peace (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 545.
103 B-29 photoreconnaissance plane: NYT, Nov. 8, 1954.
104 "admit too much": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New York:
    Harper & Row, 1986), p. 81.
104 "overflight is urgent": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 33.
106 driving around Washington: Welzenbach, "Din Land," p. 28.
106 "technically feasible": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 82.
106 "through a grilling": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie Smith, Kelly:
    More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
    Press, 1989), p. 121.
106 secret accounts: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 36.
107 "big for their britches": Nathan Twining interview with John Mason, June-
    September 1967, CU.
                                380         Notes


109 "contingency reserve": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances
    T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 96.


                    Chapter 6: The Role of a Lifetime

1 14 "difficult to answer": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances
     T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
     Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 7.
115 iconoclastic interests: Evan Thomas, The Very Best Men: Four Who Dared, the Early
     Years of the CIA (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995), p. 89.
116 the Sea Witch: Ibid., p. 177.
117   "most important goals": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 1 3 .
118   "most worthwhile years ".Tbi d . , p . 2 9 .
119   "met him socially ": Ibid., p. 68.
120   "before I committed": Ibid., p. 77.
121   "With hindsight": Ibid., pp. 90-91.
122   "Nobody knew": Richard M. Bissell interview with Ed Edwin, June 5, 1967,
      DDEL.

123 "no technical background": Richard M. Bissell interview with Ed Edwin, Nov. 9,
    1976, DDEL.
123   "a lot of rules": Bob King interview, Oct. 19, 1999.
123   "Why bother": Ibid.
123   "Don 't come in ": John McMahon interview, Nov. 12,1 999.
124   "only regulations": Stanley Beerli interview, Sept. 23, 1999.
124   "how to twist arms": Arthur Lundahl interview with Peter Jessup, June 10-
      Oct.8, 1981, CU.
124 "about five pages": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 99.
124 "barrier of secrecy": Ibid., p. 100.
125 "Bissell turned to Land ": King interview.
125 "potential consequences": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 100.
125 "very knowledgeable": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie Smith, Kelly:
    More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
    Press, 1989), p. 122.
125 "loved that stuff": King interview.
125 "always business": Ibid.
126 steak and kidney pie: Betty King interview, Oct. 19, 1999.


        Chapter 7: "This Thing Is Made Out of Toilet Paper"
128 "beautiful picture postcards": Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works (New
    York: Little, Brown, 1994), pp. 117-118.
129 "speed and secrecy": Jay Miller, Lockheed Martins Skunk Works (Leicester, Eng.:
    Midland Publishing, 1995), p. 77.
                                  Notes               381


129 expressed puzzlement: Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
    and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
    of Intelligence, 1998), p. 60.
129 not marked SECRET: Presentation by Henry G. Combs, U-2 History Sympo-
           sium, National Defense University, Sept. 17, 1998.
130 shortage of Flit: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 62.
131 stuffed with sanitary napkins: William E. Burrows, "That New Black Magic," Air
    & Space, Dec. 1998-Jan. 1999, p. 32.
131 "made out of toilet paper": Transcript, "Spy in the Sky," The American Experience,
    PBS.
1 3 1 "redraw it": Burrows, "That New Black Magic," p. 3 1 .
132 less vulnerable: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 47.
135 not fully understood: Richard P. Hallion, Air Force History and Museums Pro-
           gram, "Aerospace Medicine Nears the Millennium: Adaptation, Anticipation
    and Advancement," address before the Aerospace Medical Association, May
    17, 1999.
135 new pressure suit: Both Lovelace and Flickinger had firsthand experience with
    high-altitude parachuting. Dr. Lovelace had tested oxygen equipment specially
    designed for bailouts by jumping from a B- 1 7 bomber at 40,000 feet over Wash-
              ington State on June 25,1 943 . The daring jump — Lovelace's first and last — was
    chronicled by both Life and Look magazines, a public relations coup in those
    days. He was knocked unconscious when his parachute opened with tremen-
          dous force in the thin air and his left hand was badly frostbitten in the subzero
    temperature after two layers of gloves came loose. Limply swinging like a rag
    doll in his parachute harness, Lovelace drifted back to earth for better than ten
    minutes before regaining consciousness at about 8,000 feet. He landed in a daze
    in a wheat field. During World War II, Dr. Flickinger had jumped from planes
    over the border between Burma and China to give medical assistance to pilots
    who had been shot down ferrying cargo to China. After the war years he had
    worked on aircraft ejection seats that incorporated oxygen canisters that would
    prevent pilots from blacking out as they descended to lower altitudes.
138 long landing strip: Chris Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane: Toward the Unknown (Atglen,
    Pa.: Schiffer Publishing, 2000), p. 27.
138 "the deeper we sank": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances
    T Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 102.
139 the edge of space: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 72-73.
139 "don't even have a credit rating": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie
    Smith, Kelly: More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian In-
              stitution Press, 1989), p. 123.
140 "fuselage out ofjig": Jay Miller, Lockheed U-2 (Austin, Tex.: Aerofax, 1983), p. 78.
140 dubbed the U-2: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 66.
141 "Vllgive it one shot": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New York:
    Harper & Row, 1986), p. 105.
                                  382       Notes


141 "searching my heart and mind": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
    1953-56: Mandate for Change (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1963), p. 520.
142 refine its targeting plans: Sergei Khrushchev interview with R. Cargill Hall and
    Richard S. Leghorn, July 5, 1995.
142   "a limited success": Eisenhower, Mandate for Change, p. 530.
143   "a big goddamn sailplane": Rich and Janos, Skunk Works, p. 131.
143   "so smooth": Ibid., p. 135.
144   "wings flapping about": Presentation by Ernest Joiner, U-2 History Symposium,
      National Defense University, Sept. 17, 1998.
144 "Pogo sticks worked real well": Miller, Lockheed U-2, p. 79.
145 "bounce itself to pieces": "Spy in the Sky" transcript.
145 "down and safe ": Ibid .
146 nothing about the U-2: Donald E. Welzenbach unpublished manuscript.
146 "great gains for the West": US. News & World Report, Aug. 5, 1955, pp. 70-75.
146 "easily have airplanes": Ibid.
147 Bissell told him: Welzenbach manuscript.
147 "seen the light": Ibid.
147 "glamorous and high-priority": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 109.
148 "civilian operation": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 106.
148 "lock, stock, and barrel": Nathan Twining interview with John Mason, June-
    September 1967, CU.
148 "quite a year": Miller, Skunk Works, p. 80.


         Chapter 8: Photographing the President's Cattle
149 "long-focal-length": "The U-2 Camera, Its Creation and Technical Capabili-
          ties," presentation by James G. Baker, U-2 History Symposium, National De-
          fense University, Sept. 17, 1998.
150 "untested frontiers": Ibid.
151 logical way: Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA and the
    U-2 Program, 1954-1974 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of In-
                 telligence, 1998), pp. 48-55.
152 sharper pictures: Ibid.
1 52 replaced the prism: Ibid.; Baker, "The U-2 Camera"; Chris Pocock, The U-2 Spy-
     plane: Toward the Unknown (Atglen, Pa.: Schiffer Publishing, 2000), pp. 25-26.
152 exposed simultaneously: Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane, pp. 25-26.
153 disappointing results: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 55.
154 good enough to enlarge: Arthur Lundahl interview with Peter Jessup, June
      10-Oct.8, 1981, CU.
1 54 "other problems were slippery ": Ibid.
155 "articulate speaker": Dino A. Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball: The Inside Story of the
     Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: Random House, 1990), p. 1 1.
155 "win the next war": Lundahl interview.
155 "enlightened leadership ": Ibid.
                                     Notes        383


155 "primitive conditions ": Ibid.
155 "Sherlock Holmes": Ibid.
156 "certain disbelief ": Ibid.
1 56 "nothing compared": Ibid.
157 "you don't think": Peter Grose, Gentleman Spy: The Life of Allen Dulles (New
     York: Houghton Mifflin, 1994), p. 404.
1 5 8 "intelligence Automat": Lundahl interview.
159 "above average qualifications": Memorandum for Mr. Richard Bissell, Dec. 27,
      1955, NARA, Record Group 263, CIA Declassified Reference Material, Box
      44, Folder 13.
159 lacked the experience: Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane, p. 35.
1 59 "only American pilots": Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works (New York: Lit-
          tle, Brown, 1994), p. 142.
159 secret government operation: Martin Knutson interview, Nov. 22, 1999.
1 59 "exotic state-of-the-art airplane ": Ibid.
161 serious medical enterprise: Photographs in private collection of Dr. Donald E.
     Kilgore Jr., former chief executive officer of the clinic.
161 "nature s sanatorium ": Jake W. Spidle Jr. , The Lovelace Medical Center: Pioneer in
    American Health Care (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1987),

     p. 5. began in 1922: Spidle, The Lovelace Medical Center, p. 36; Richard G.
162 clinic
    Elliott, "On a Comet, Always: A Biography of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II,"
    New Mexico Quarterly 36, no. 4, 1966, pp. 356-357; Shirley Thomas, Men of
    Space: Profiles of the Leaders in Space Research, Development and Exploration
    (Philadelphia: Chilton, 1960), p. 42.
162 "parachute and a first-aid kit": Donald Kilgore interview, Mar. 18, 2001.
163 "shotgun approach ": Ibid .
163 "one look at it": Knutson interview.
163 "no kids' toy": Ibid.
163 "highest-workload plane": Ibid.
1 64 "aircraft will come apart": Ibid.
165 from Mars: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 78-79; Pocock,
     The U-2 Spyplane, p. 39; Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and
     Frances T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New
     Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 107.
165 external bladder: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 64.
165 as much as six pounds: Ibid., p. 65.
166 members of Congress: Ibid., p. 88.
167 " 'close to incredible' ": Andrew Goodpaster interview, November 2, 1999; tran-
             script, "Spy in the Sky," The American Experience, PBS.
168 full responsibility: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 89.
168 "other parts of the world": Ibid., p. 94; Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane, p. 43.
                                  384         Notes


                        Chapter 9: Big Game Hunting

1 70 "formidable sight": NYT, May 2 , 1 954, p. 1 .
170 Bison bombers: NIE 1 1-4-54, "Soviet Capabilities and Probable Courses of Ac-
          tion Through Mid- 1959," Sept. 14, 1954, in Estimates on Soviet Military Power
     1954 to 1984, A Selection, ed. Donald P. Steury (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center
     for the Study of Intelligence, December 1994), p. 36.
171 "biggest airforce": NYT, May 15, 1954,p.5.
171 "sober inferences": NYT, June 20, 1954, p. 1.
171 somewhat more positive: NYT, June 21, 1954, p. 1.
172 vast destruction: NYT, Feb. 9, 1956, p. 1.
173   "in the process of'surpassing": NYT, May 18, 1955, p. 1.
174   "just not true": NYT, Mzy\9, 1955, p. 1.
174   "deeply concerned": NYT, June 29, 1955, p. 1.
174   "exert every . . . effort": NYT, June 29, 1955, p. 1.
174   "technological mystery": AW, Sept. 26, 1955, p. 14.
175   "crucial scientific-industrial race": NYT, Feb. 2, 1956, p. 10.
175   "proper posture": NYT, Feb. 9, 1956, p. 1. Eisenhower wished Gardner "success
      in the years ahead," but at least in public showed little sign that he recognized
      the vital role the irascible Welshman had played in pushing Washington to deal
      with the Soviet threat by making use of new technologies. In a brief, under-
              stated farewell letter that must have incensed Gardner, Eisenhower said Wil-
           son "has advised me of the energy you have displayed in your work during the
      past three years, and I commend it." Gardner soon resumed a senior manage-
              ment role at Hycon Manufacturing Company, the Pasadena firm where he had
      worked before joining the Eisenhower administration. Before his resignation
      from the Air Force, the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
      had questioned Gardner about possible conflicts of interest involving his role
      in the missile program and Hycon's work as a subcontractor. Gardner denied
      any conflict, but the issue stirred speculation in Washington that the problem
    might have spurred his resignation. Gardner died in 1963 at the age of forty-
    eight.
176 "nightmare of the missilemen": Time, Jan. 30, 1956, pp. 52-56.
176 "any point in the world": U.S. News & World Report, May 4, 1956, p. 34.
176 "decisive surprise attack":]. R. Killianjr. to Arthur S. Flemming, May 14, 1956,
    DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 16, Killian report (1).
176 "soul-searching questions": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New
    York: Harper & Row, 1986), p. 1 18.
177 "count the automobiles": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
    1956-61: Waging Peace (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 41 of photo
    collection.
177 "fail to detect it": Gregory W Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA and
    the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of
    Intelligence, 1998), p. 97.
                                   Notes              385


111 "reasonable safety": Eisenhower, Waging Peace, pp. 545-546.
178 "plane would disintegrate": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 118.
178 "swashbuckling bravado": Eisenhower, Waging Peace, p. 546.
178 L-pills: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 65-66.
179 "Death will follow": Liquid "L" Ampoules, undated memo, NARA, Record
     Group 263, CIA Declassified Reference Material, Box 43, Folder 8.
179 Lemon Drops: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 125.
179 shellfish toxin: Ibid.
1 79 deadly devices: Evan Thomas, The Very Best Men: Four Who Dared: The Early
     Years of the CIA (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1 995), p. 2 2 2 . In the fall of 1 960,
     when Bissell was directing a plot to assassinate Lumumba, he was offered a
     choice of toxins, including rabbit fever, undulant fever, tuberculosis, anthrax,
     smallpox, and sleeping sickness.
180 outweighed the political damage: NYT, Feb. 19, 1956, p. 24.
180 "grounds for irritation": Memorandum for the Record, Conference of Joint
    Chiefs of Staff with the President, Feb. 10, 1956, DDEL, OSS, Alphabetical
    Subseries.
180 "not interested": Memorandum for the Record, Mar. 13, 1956, DDEL, OSS,
    Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 14, Intelligence Matters (1).
181 test photographs: Beschloss, Mayday, p. 116.
182 "deep operations": Memorandum for the Record, June 21, 1956, DDEL, OSS,
    Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 14, Intelligence Matters (1).
183 "ten calendar days": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances
    T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 111.
183 elliptical memorandum: Memorandum for the Record, July 3, 1956, DDEL,
    OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 14, Intelligence Matters (2).
183 "short leash ": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 111.
183 "big game ": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 121.
183 Mission 2013: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 104-105.
184 "snap up and tap me": Transcript, "Spy in the Sky," The American Experience,
    PBS.
1 84 "/ didn h tell them ": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 1 2 3 .
184 Bohlen . . . hadnotbeen told: Ibid., pp. 121-122.
185 "Fourth of July": "Spy in the Sky" transcript.
185 "laughing": Ibid.
185 "We welcomed him": AW, May 16, 1960; NYT, May 10, 1950, p. 1.
185 "the first is the safest": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 105.
1 85 "discovered or tracked": Ibid., p. 106.
1 85 "should be suspended": Ibid.
1 86 "at the maximum rate": Ibid.
186 "actually received": Memorandum, for the Record, July 10, 1956, DDEL, OSS,
    Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 14, Intelligence Matters (2).
187 simply wrong: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 111.
                                   386           Notes


188 "deprived Khrushchev": Eisenhower, Waging Peace, p. 547fh.
1 88 "can V lay a mitt on us": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 133.
188 "minor percentage": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 110.
1 89 "loss of confidence ": Ibid.
189 every flight plan be submitted: Beschloss, Mayday, p. 133.
189 "dirty birds": Pedlow and Welzenbach, TheCIAandthe U-2, pp. 128-133.

                            Chapter 10: Earthbound

194 "more appalling": William E. Burrows, This New Ocean: The Story of the First
    Space Age (New York: Random House, 1998), p. 102.
195 achievements were little known: Walter A. McDougall, . . . The Heavens and the
    Earth: A Political History of the Space Age (New York: Basic Books, 1985), p. 77.
196 dozens ofV-2 rockets: Ibid., p. 89.
196 Project MX-774: Ibid., p. 97.
197 "for a long period of time": Ibid., p. 98.
197 independent Air Force: Ibid., p. 103.
197 smaller warhead: Ibid., p. 106.
199 number one . . . project: Ibid., p. 107.
199 "truly awesome technical problems": Report of the Technological Capabilities
    Panel,DDEL,p.63.
199 "intercontinental ballistic missile": Ibid., p. 64.
199 crippling: R. Cargill Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance and the Genesis
    of Project Corona," in Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth, the First NRO Re-
                  connaissance Eyein Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald (Bethesda, Md.: American
    Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997), pp. 107-108.
200 "System Requirement (No. 5)": Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris,
    RANDs Role in the Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Re-
          lated U.S. Space Technology, R-3692-RC (Santa Monica, Calif.: 1988), p. 61.
200 "daylight visual coverage": Ibid., p. 62.
201 one-tenth of the level: National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona Story,"
    1988, p. 5.
202 Polar Year: The first International Polar Year was 1882 and the second fifty
    years later, but scientists at that time decided it should be held every twenty-
    five years.
202 a research satellite: McDougall, . . . The Heavens, pp. 118-119.
202 "small, inexpensive satellites": Report of the Technological Capabilities Panel,
    p. 147.
203 "immediate program ": Ibid., p. 152.
204 "psychological benefits": NSC 5520, "Draft Statement of Policy on U.S. Scientific
    Satellite Program, General Considerations," DDEL, NSC, Policy Papers Sub-
    series, Box 16, NSC 5520 (2), p. 3.
204 "cannot afford to lose": NSC 5520, Annex B.
204 "large surveillance satellite": NSC 5520, pp. 2-3.
                                Notes             387


205 register any objections: Minutes of 250th NSC meeting, DDEL, AW, NSC Se-
          ries, Box 6, 250th NSC meeting.
205 "peaceful purposes": NSC 5520, p. 4.
205 "lam now announcing": NYT,]\x\y 30, 1955, p. 8.
205 "The only connection ": Ibid.
206 "no utility": Ibid., p. 1.
207 The first Viking: Burrows, This New Ocean, p. 134.
207 Redstone would be ready: Army Satellite Chronology, Dec. 12, 1957, DDEL,
    Bryce Harlow Papers, Box 2, Satellites and Missiles 1958-60, p. 2.
207 von Braun s rocket: McDougall, . . . The Heavens, p. 123.
208 Jupiter-C: Ibid., p. 130.
208 more profitable Titan: Burrows, This New Ocean, p. 172.
209 "psychological importance": Memorandum for Mr. William H. Jackson, DDEL,
    OCB, Subject Series, Box 8, Space Satellites, Rockets etc. (1) 1956-57.
209 "strong moral position": Memorandum for the Assistant Secretary of Defense,
    June 22, 1956, DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Department of Defense Subseries,
    Box 6, Missiles and Satellites, vol. I, Jan. 56-May 57 (1).
210 "an isolated action ": Ibid.
210 "so many uncertainties": NYT, May 20, 1957, p. 1 .
210 "solve the problems": NYT, June 2, 1957, p. 1.
2 10 "within the next few months": NYT, June 11, 1957, p. 2.
210 outlined the launch schedule: NYT, June 23, 1957, p. 12.
2 1 1 "the Communist world has won ": NYT, Aug. 27, 1957, p. 1 .
2 1 1 "Soviet Fires Earth Satellite": NYT, Oct. 5, 1957, p. 1 .

                       Chapter 1 1 : Creating Corona

212 "crisis of confidence": James R. Killian Jr., Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower: A
    Memoir of the First Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology
    (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977), p. 7.
213 "a severe blow ": USIA Office of Research and Intelligence, "World Opinion and
    the Soviet Satellite, A Preliminary Evaluation," Oct. 17, 1957, DDEL, NSC,
    Briefing Notes Subseries, Box 7, Earth Satellites (3).
213 "confused, dismayed and shaken": Statement by George V. Allen, Director, U.S.
    Information Agency, before House Science and Astronautics Committee, Jan.
    22, 1960, DDEL, PCLAA, Box 5, Science and Technology, No. 23 (2).
213 "a devastating blow": NYT, Oct. 6, 1957, p. 1.
213 "the position . . . will be critical": NYT, Oct. 6, 1957, p. 1.
214 "high proficiency": Robert R. McMath, Lawrence A. Hyland, George B. Kisti-
    akowsky, and Francis H. Clauser to Allen W Dulles, Oct. 23, 1957, DDEL,
    Papers of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Box 1 , CIA Oct.
    1957-Oct. 1958.
214 "prepared to shed blood": McMath et al. to Dulles, Oct. 23, 1957.
2 14 "never thought of our program": NYT, Oct. 6, 1957, p. 1.
                                388          Notes


214 "without . . . significance": Robert A. Divine, The Sputnik Challenge (New York:
    Oxford University Press, 1993), p. xv.
214 "flip and inadequate": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 10.
214 "impressive": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years, 1956-61: Waging
    Peace (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 205.
215 "ominously suggested": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 3 .
215 "respective strengths ": Ibid . , p . 5 .
216 "outer space is international": Proposed White House Release, Oct. 7, 1957,
    DDEL, James Hagerty Papers, Box 9, Satellite Announcement.
216 "limit of national sovereignty ": NYT, Oct. 13, 1957, p. 1.
217 lacked adequate finding: Memorandum of Conference with the President, Oct.
    8, 1957, DDEL, AW, DDE Diary, Box 27, Oct. 57 staff notes (2).
217 possible alternative: Memorandum of Conference with the President, Oct. 8,
     1957.
218 "by one iota": NYT, Oct. 10, 1957, p. 1.
2 1 8 "He was startled": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, pp. 10-11.
218 "an unexpected naivete": NYT, Oct. 10, 1957, p. 1.
219 "foothold in outer space": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 9.
219 equipped with a camera: Minutes of 3 39th NSC Meeting, DDEL, AW, NSC Se-
           ries, Box 9, 339th NSC Meeting, Oct. 10, 1957, p. 4.
219 interservice rivalries: Ibid., pp. 10-12.
220 "Satellite That Could Film the Earth": NYT, Oct. 14, 1957, p. 1.
221 "scientific country": Handwritten notes by Andrew G. Goodpaster, ODM Sci-
           ence Advisory Committee meeting, Oct. 15, 1957, DDEL, SA, Subject Sub-
    series, Box 7, Science Advisory Committee (2) Mar.-Oct. 1957.
221 "intellectual leadership": Killian, Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower, p. 16.
222 "attitude toward science": Memorandum of Conference with the President, Oct.
    15, 1957, DDEL, AW, DDE Diary, Box 27, Oct. 57 staffnotes (2).
222 second, much heavier satellite: NYT, Nov. 5, 1957, p. 1.
223 "dramatic demonstration ": NYT, Nov. 4, 1957, p. 10.
223 electronic beeps: Ibid .
223 still limping along: NYT, Nov. 9, 1957, p. 1.
223 "distinctly greater": NYT, Nov. 8, 1957, p. 10.
224 "unquestioned national authority": Divine, The Sputnik Challenge, p. 50.
224 "completely intact": Dwight D. Eisenhower speech, "Science in National Secu-
           rity," Nov. 7, 1957, DDEL, AW, Speech Series, Box 23, "Science in National
    Security."
225 ablation cooling: T. A. Heppenheimer, Countdown: A History of Space Flight (New
    York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997), pp. 83-84.
227 "terrible design": Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris, RANDs Role in the
    Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Related U.S. Space Tech-
             nology, R-3692-RC (Santa Monica, Calif.: 1988), p. 79.
227 well aware: R. Cargill Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance and the Gene-
        sis of Project Corona," in Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth, the First NRO
                                 Notes            389


     Reconnaissance Eye in Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald (Bethesda, Md.: American
     Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997), pp. 110-111.
229 copy to Schriever: "A History of Satellite Reconnaissance, vol. 1: Corona," Na-
            tional Reconnaissance Office, 1988, pp. 10-11.
229 "priority national effort'": Richard Leghorn, memo to David Beckler, May 16,
    1957, DDEL.
229 "aerial inspection": Because secret spy satellites were so critical to the arms con-
         trol process, officials had to come up with a declassified way of talking about
    them to reassure the public that the agreements were verifiable. The answer
    was one of the oddest euphemisms of the cold war. The government, arms con-
         trol officials would say, could monitor Soviet compliance through "national
    technical means."
230 "second story": Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance," p. 111.
230 end of August: National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona Story," p. 1 1.
231 "high watermark": Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
    and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
    of Intelligence, 1998), p. 143.
232 "valuable intelligence": Merton E. Davies and Amron H. Katz et al., A Family of
    Recoverable Satellites, RM-2012 (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp., 1957),

     p.l.
232 "detailed, accurate identification ": Ibid. , p. 2 3 .
233 "By the end": Victor McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin Land
    (Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), pp. 326-327.
233 Lockheed outlined: WS-117L Development Plan for Program Acceleration,
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Jan. 6, 1958, foreword and introduction.
235 "laughing-stock": Minutes of 347th NSC Meeting, Dec. 5, 1957, DDEL, AW,
    NSC Series, Box 9, 347th NSC Meeting.
235 "Vanguard Rocket Burns": NYT, Dec. 7, 1957, p. 1.
235 Soviet newspapers: NYT, Dec. 8, 1957, p. 1.
236 "New Year's Eve": NYT, Feb. 1, 1958, p. 1.
236 "imagination and boldness": NYT, Feb. 2, 1958, p. 42.
238 "selected targets": NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 20.
238 "Defense 'space' agency": Memorandum of Conference with the President, Feb.
    7, 1958, DDEL.
2 3 8 favorite cigars: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 2 1 .
239 "They went ballistic": Hall, "Post War Strategic Reconnaissance," p. 114.
240 "stopped talking to me": Merton Davies interview, Aug. 24, 1998.


             Chapter 12: "Go Off and Build That Thing"
241 "pretty shocking": James Plummer interview, Sept. 2, 1998.
242 "a flood of water": Ibid.; Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell,
    eds., Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites (Washington, D.C.:
    Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998), p. 191.
                                   390          Notes


243 "take chances": Plummer interview.
244 "second-guessing": Ibid.
245 "without telling anyone": Day et al., Eye in the Sky, p. 192.
246 "scared us all": Ibid., p. 185.
2 46 "2 5 -foot ground resolution ": Ibi d . , p . 195.
246 Old Executive Office Building: No records of this meeting have been found, and
     there is some discrepancy in recollections of where it was held. Although the
    official NRO history of Corona's development places it in Cambridge, histo-
          rian R. Cargill Hall notes that some sources recall meetings were held in Cam-
                  bridge, while others specifically remember making a trip to Washington. Ibid.,
    p. 273; National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona Story," 1988, p. 25.
247 add the Itek proposal: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 25.
247 "being broke": "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview," Direc-
           torate ofScience and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO, p. 2-2.
248 casual approach: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 26.
248 "speak in a . . . low voice": Memorandum for Project Security Officer, Mar. 27,
    1958, NRO.
249 "more convenient camera": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and
    Frances T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New
    Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 136.
249 approved the plan verbally: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 28.
249 "preselected ocean area": Project Corona Outline, Apr. 1 5, 1958, NRO.
250 "unprogrammed requirement": Memorandum for the Comptroller, reprinted in
    Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth — The First NRO Reconnaissance Eye in
    Space, ed. Robert A. McDonald (Bethesda, Md.: American Society for Pho-
    togrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997), p. 309.
251 "juggling costs": NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 41.
251 force cancellation: Ibid.
251 "considerable confusion": Memorandum         for Maj. Gen. Jacob E. Smart, Nov. 25,
    1958, NRO.
252 "ironclad agreement": "Corona Program History, Vol. 2: Governmental Activi-
           ties," Directorate of Science and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO, pp. 3-
    2, 4-64 and 4-65.
252 Corona cutbacks: Memorandum for Deputy Secretary of Defense and Special
    Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, in CIA Office of Special
    Projects History, Vol. 3, Appendix A, NRO.
252 "Battles Laws": reprinted in McDonald, Corona, p. 308.
253 "quickly and cleanly": NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 30.
253 ruin the film: Ibid., p. 35.
254 "no 'experts' ": "Corona Program History, Vol. 5: System Integration," Direc-
           torate ofScience and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO, p. 1-5.
254 "photograph the belfry": War College Speech Given by Maj. Gen. Bernard
    Schriever, Apr. 1, 1959, NRO.
                                 Notes             391


254 " 'Black Saturdays' ": Albert D. Wheelon, "Corona: A Triumph of American
    Technology," in Day et al., Eye in the Sky, p. 37.
255 "player piano": McDonald, Corona, p. 270.
255 "one paragraph ": Plummer interview.
255 "Develop and provide ": Work Statement: Development of a Satellite Reconnais-
           sance and Recovery System, Apr. 25, 1958, NRO.
256 "nothing was known": "Corona Program History, Vol. 2: Governmental Activi-
           ties," Directorate of Science and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO,
    p. 3-7.
256 host of other problems: "Corona Program History, Vol. 3: Corona Cameras," Di-
                 rectorate ofScience and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO, pp. 2-3, 2-4,
    4-1,4-2.
256 Design alterations: "Corona Program History, Vol. 3," pp. 4-1,4-2.
257 far behind: "Corona Program History, Vol. 2," p. 3-7.
257 "There was no way": Don H. Schoessler and Charles Spoelhof interview with
     Cargill Hall, May 16, 1997, NRO.
258 steel film: Ibid.
258 fine glass particles: Ibid.
260 rapid series of steps: "Corona Program History, Vol. 4: Recovery from Orbit,"
    Directorate of Science and Technology, CIA, May 19, 1976, NRO, p. 2-12.
260 After separation: "Corona Program History, Vol. 4," pp. 2-12-2-15.
261 doubted the plan: Curtis Peebles, The Corona Project: Americas First Spy Satellites
    (Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 1997), p. 59.
262 "filing, chipping and sawing": "Corona Program History, Vol. 5," p. 1-10.
266 camera ports: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 44.
266 "hundreds of people": "Spies Above: National Photographic Interpretation Cen-
           ter," video produced by NRO.
267 "no capability": "Corona Program History, Vol. 2," p. 4-43.
267 "live animals": Ibid., p. 4-39.
267 "Polar orbit": Ibid., pAA2.
2 68 "I didn V know ": John Finney interview, Oct. 21,1 999.
268 "basic information": NYT, Dec. 4, 1958, p. 1.
269 200 square miles: AJV, Dec. 8, 1958, p. 31.


                           Chapter 13: Heartbreak

270 "followed his hunches": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New York:
    Harper & Row, 1986), p. 161.
270 "mounting almost to panic": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
    1956-61: Waging Peace (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 546.
271 The mishap: Memorandum for the Record, Feb. 6, 1959, NRO.
271 "Eisenhower upbraided": National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona Story,"
    1988, p. 47.
                                  392          Notes


2 7 1 "signed the report": "Secret Satellite," video produced by NRO.
2 7 1 carried no camera: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 47.
273 "deterrent remains effective": Memorandum of Conference with the President,
      Feb. 4, 1958, DDEL, AW, DDE Diaries Series, Box 18, Staff Notes Feb. 1958.
273 "new type of threat": National Intelligence Estimate 1 1-6-54, "Soviet Capabili-
        ties and Probably Programs in the Guided Missile Field," Oct. 5, 1954, in Sher-
          man Kent and the Board of National Estimates: Collected Essays, ed. Donald Steury,
    (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1994), p. 56.
273 intercontinental missile: Addendum to CIA Draft of Special National Intelli-
                gence Estimate 11-10-57, "Soviet ICBM Production and Deployment," in
     CIAs Analysis of the Soviet Union 1947-1991: A Documentary Collection, eds. Ger-
         ald K. Haines and Robert E. Leggett (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the
     Study of Intelligence, 2001), p. 9.
274 "gravest danger": Washington Post, Dec. 20, 1957.
274 knockout attack: Eisenhower, Waging Peace, p. 220.
274 Joseph Alsop: Edgar M. Bottome, The Missile Gap: A Study of the Formulation of
    Military and Political Policy (Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University
    Press, 1971), p. 80.
275 top secret estimate: Memorandum of Conference with the President, June 18,
     1958, DDEL, AW, DDE Diaries Series, Box 20, Staff Notes June 1958.
276 5 -megaton warhead: Gregory W Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
    and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
    of Intelligence, 1998), pp. 159-60.
276 balance of power: NYT,]zn.2S, 1959, p. 1.
276 "serial production": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 160.
277 arsenal of five hundred: Briefing of the Director of Central Intelligence, Senate
    Armed Services Committee, CIA Subcommittee, Jan. 16, 1959, NARA,
    Record Group 263, CIA Declassified Reference Material, Box 25, Folder 6, pp.
    6 and 9.
277 "very great danger": NYT, Jan. 30, 1959, p. 1.
278 "Won't Race": Ibid.
278 "books have been juggled": John Prados, The Soviet Estimate: U.S. Intelligence
    Analysis and Russian Military Strength (New York: Dial Press, 1982), p. 90.
278 artificially reduced: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 159-161.
278 "undue influence": Memorandum of a Conference with the President, Feb. 10,
     1959, DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelli-
             gence Matters (8).
2 79 U-3: Jay Miller, Lockheed Martin s Skunk Works (Leicester, Eng.: Midland Pub-
                lishing, 1995), p. 114.
280 "especially, more speed": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie Smith, Kelly:
    More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
    Press, 1989), p. 135.
280 "three times the speed of sound": Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works (New
    York: Little, Brown, 1994), p. 193.
                                 Notes             393


280   "five miles higher": Ibid.
280   "Archangel": Miller, Skunk Works, p. 1 14.
280   "blazing speed": Rich and Janos, Skunk Works, p. 197.
281   "get the map": Richard M. Bissell Jr. interview with Ed Edwin, June 5, 1967,
      DDEL.
282 Twining seconded: Memorandum for the Record, John S. D. Eisenhower, Feb.
    12, 1959, DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelli-
           gence Matters (8).
282 "surrender of West Berlin ": Eisenhower, Waging Peace, p. 446.
283 brazen violations: Memorandum for the Record, John S. D. Eisenhower, DDEL.
283 ample intelligence: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, pp. 147 and
    161-162.
283 warned Eisenhower: Ibid., pp. 161-162.
283 a mirage: Memorandum for the Record, John S. D. Eisenhower, Feb. 12, 1959.
283 at Tyuratam: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 160.
284 "political costs": Memorandum of Conference with the President, Apr. 7, 1959,
    DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelligence Mat-
         ters (10).
284   "terrible propaganda": Ibid.
284   "some kind of progress": Ibid.
285   "I felt less sure": Ibid.
285   "cloud of white smoke": NYT, Apr. 14, 1959, p. 1.
286   "north-south orbit": Ibid.
286 "return with their information ": Ibid.
286 "snag the parachute ": Ibid.
2 86 "It was a bad night": Frank Buzard interview, Nov. 17,1 999.
286 "starburst": NYT, kpr.2?>,\959.
286 embarrassing mistake: NYT, Apr. 15, 1959, p. 1.
287 "pretty convinced": James Plummer interview, Sept. 2, 1998.
287 "circular tracks": Dwayne A. Day, "The Development and Improvement of the
    Corona Satellite," in Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell, eds.,
    Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites (Washington, D.C.: Smith-
             sonian Institution Press, 1998), p. 53.
288 furry passengers: "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview," p. 5-2.
288 Animal rights groups: Void.
289 "hideously expensive": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances
    T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 137.
289 "crying need": Day et al., Eye in the Sky, p. 1 82 .
289 " 'Its so important' ": Ibid., p. 174.
290 "bad weather": Andrew Goodpaster interview, Nov. 2, 1999.
290 "lets proceed": Plummer interview.
290 "guessing game": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 137.
291 controlled by bandits: Memorandum for the Record, Andrew Goodpaster, July 7,
                                      394     Notes


     1959, DDEL; Chris Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane: Toward the Unknown (Atglen,
     Pa.: Schiffer Publishing, 2000), p. 152.
291 "costly and harmful": Memorandum        of a Conference with the President, July 8,
    1959, DDEL.
292 "fight a war": Ibid.
292 "assent to the operation ": Ibid.
292 take off before dawn: Stanley Beerli interview, Sept. 23, 1999; Pocock, The U-2
    Spyplane, pp. 152-153.
293 "Really getting hairy": Rich andjanos, Skunk Works, p. 150.
293 photographs were superb: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 163.
293 "stock of rockets": William E. Burrows, Deep Black: Space Espionage and National
    Security (New York: Random House, 1986), p. 101.
294 beset with problems: "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview,"
    pp. 5-3 and 5-4.
294 "bleakest moment": Victor McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin
    Land (Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998) p. 33 1.
294 "multiple failures": "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview,"
     p. 5-4.
295 "pressed on": Albert D. Wheelon, "Corona: A Triumph of American Technol-
           ogy," inDay et al., Eye in the Sky, p. 38.
295 crumbled into dust: National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona Story," 1988,
    pp. 48-52.
295 "considerable confusion": "Corona Program History, Vol. 1 : Program Overview,"
     p. 5-4.of the satellite: Ibid.
296 pieces
296 "completely verified": NYT, Feb. 25, 1960, p. 1.
296 " 'crash' program": National Intelligence Estimate 11-5-59, "Soviet Capabili-
         ties in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles," Sept. 1959, in CIAs Analysis of the
    Soviet Union, 1941-1991, A Documentary Collection, eds. Gerald K. Haines and
    Robert E. Leggett (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of Intelli-
                 gence, 2001), pp. 126-135.
297 true purpose: Beschloss, Mayday, p. 234.
297 "Dulles was determined": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 165.
297 "one tremendous asset": Memorandum for the Record, Feb. 8, 1960, DDEL,
    OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelligence Matters (13).


              Chapter 14: "Capsule Recovered Undamaged"
298 "high probability": Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The CIA
    and the U-2 Program, 1954-1914 (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study
    of Intelligence, 1998), p. 168.
298 bell-ringing findings: Ibid.
299 "the intelligence estimate": Richard M. Bissell interview with Ed Edwin, DDEL.
299 approved one flight: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 167.
                                Notes             395


299 Operation Square Deal: Chris Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane: Toward the Unknown
    (Atglen, Pa.: Schiffer Publishing 2000), p. 171.
300 higher cruising altitude: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 152.
300 out of range: Pocock, The U-2 Spyplane, pp. 172-173.
300 "had an opportunity": Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testa-
          ment (Boston: Little, Brown, 1974), p. 443.
300 "logical step": Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2, p. 170. Part of this
    material has been redacted by the CIA; however, it seems logical to surmise
    that the first blank space referred to Pakistan or Peshawar and the second is a
    reference to Allen Dulles.
300 "virtually inviting us": George Kistiakowsky, A Scientist in the White House: A
    Private Diary of President Eisenhowers Special Assistant for Science and Technology
    (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976), p. 328.
301 "or so we believed": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances T.
    Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), pp. 123-134.
302 lost in space: "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview," 1988,
    p.5-7,NRO.
303 Critchfield declined: Evan Thomas, The Very Best Men: Four Who Dared: The
    Early Years of the CIA (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995), pp. 205-206.
303 "one additional operation ": Memorandum for the Record, Apr. 25,1 960, DDEL,
    OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelligence Matters
    3-5/60(14).
303 "virtually disintegrate": Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years,
    1956-61: Waging Peace (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 546.
304 "big rolls of film": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, pp. 121-122.
304 "greater and greater": Andrew D. Goodpaster interview.
304 "a grave mistake": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 125.
305 veteran of the U-2 program: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2,
    p. 174.
305 article 360: Ibid., p. 175.
305 "Once airborne": Ibid., p. 176.
306 "sick and tired": Khrushchev, The Last Testament, p. 444.
306 orange fireball: Francis Gary Powers, with Curt Gentry, Operation Overflight:
    The U-2 Pilot Tells His Story for the First Time (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston, 1970), p. 82.
307 destruction switch: Ibid., pp. 82-88.
307 plowed into the ground: Bissell and other CIA officers initially suspected that
    pilot error or an engine flameout had brought the U-2 down to around 50,000
     before it was attacked — a view that assumed the Russians really couldn't hit the
     aircraft at its cruising altitude above 70,000 feet. Later evidence showed that
     the plane was flying at the higher altitude.
307 " 'winds are going to blow ' ": Michael R. Beschloss, Mayday: The U-2 Affair (New
    York: Harper & Row, 1986), p. 34.
                                  396         Notes


308 "confuse the government": Khrushchev, The Last Testament, p. 446.
308 " 'Lake Van area" ": Untitled document, May 2, 1960, DDEL, OSS, Subject Se-
          ries, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 15, Intelligence Matters (14).
309 "weather observations": NYT, May 6, 1960, p. 1.
309 "count to ten": Memorandum of Conversation, Bipartisan Leaders Breakfast
    with the President, May 26, 1960, DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical
    Subseries, Box 25, U-2 Incident, Vol. 1, May 1960 (8), p. 6.
309 "pilot was dead": Khrushchev, The Last Testament, p. 446.
309 "prove to be a mistake": Beschloss, Mayday, p. 248.
310 "no authorization ": Transcript, State Department press and radio news briefing,
    May 7, 1960, DDEL, OSS, Subject Series, Alphabetical Subseries, Box 25, U-2
    Incident, Vol. 1, May 1960 (2).
3 1 0 "United States admitted": NYT, May 8, 1 960, p. 1 .
310 "presidency has been parceled out ": Ibid.
311 "incompetence": New York Herald Tribune, May 10, 1960.
3 1 1 "depressed and humiliated": NYT, May 9, 1 960, p. 1 .
311 "seemed very depressed": Diary entry, Ann C. Whitman, May 9, 1960, DDEL,
      AW, Ann Whitman Diary Series, Box 1 1, ACW Diary, May 1960.
311 dodgy strategy: Telephone Calls, May 9, 1960, 9:10 a.m., DDEL, Christian A.
      Herter Papers, 1957-61, Box 10, Presidential Telephone Calls 1-6/60 (1).
311 Nixon bluntly warned: Telephone Calls, May 9, 1960, 10:15 a.m., DDEL,
      Christian A. Herter Papers, 1957-61, Box 12, CAH Telephone Calls 3/28-
      6/30/60 (2).
311 unusual methods: Telephone Calls, May 9, 1960, 9:55 a.m., DDEL, Christian A.
    Herter Papers, 1957-61, Box 10, Presidential Telephone Calls, 1-6/60 (1).
312 "approved specific flights": Minutes of National Security Council Meeting, May
    24, 1960, DDEL, AW, NSC Series, Box 12, 445th NSC Meeting.
313 "under strict control": White House news conference transcript, May 11, 1960,
    DDEL, AW, Press Conference Series, Box 10, Press and Radio Conference
    5/11/60.
313 "a dirty deal": NYT, June 7, 1960,p. 1.
313 "known to... Eisenhower": NYT, May 15, 1960, p. E-4.
315 "revolution in intelligence": George Tenet, speech at U-2 History Symposium,
    National Defense University, Sept. 17, 1998.
315 15 percent of the Soviet landmass: Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2,
      p. 316.
3 1 5 "invaluable": Ibid, p. 3 1 8.
316 "not back down ": Minutes of National Security Council meeting, May 24, 1 960,
      DDEL, AW, NSC Series, Box 12, 445th NSC Meeting.
316 "some idiot": Ibid.
317 additional $40 million: Ibid.
317 first Midas: NYT, May 25, 1960, p. 1.
317 "in chaos": Kistiakowsky, A Scientist at the White House, p. 3 3 1 .
318 "unsatisfactory progress ": Ibi d , p . 3 3 6 .                                    ,
                                Notes             397


318 "reconnaissance gap ": NYT, June 11,1 960, p. 1 .
318 "very early stage": NYT, June 12, 1960, Section IV, p. 6.
319 tiniest imperfections: "Corona Program History, Vol. 1: Program Overview,"
     p. 5-5.
319 "high-risk engineering": James Plummer interview.
320 stowed an American flag: Ibid.
320 "shortest and most welcome": National Reconnaissance Office, "The Corona
    Story," 1988, p. 52.
320 Belka and Strelka: Ibid.
320 did not realize: The recovered capsule was supposed to be transported quietly to
    Sunnyvale so Lockheed technicians could examine it. It was to be exchanged
    there for a substitute capsule, that would be delivered to Washington to mark
    the historic occasion. These plans were scuttled by Colonel Mathison, the im-
             pulsive Air Force officer who had led the search mission to Spitzbergen. Ap-
                   parently hoping to score a publicity coup for the Air Force, Mathison
    unexpectedly appeared on the flight deck of the Haiti Victory in a helicopter
    shortly after the capsule was winched aboard, and flew off with his prize. He
    stopped briefly in Honolulu for a photo opportunity, then flew on to Sunny-
          vale, opening the capsule en route to the dismay of project engineers. From
    Sunnyvale, he proceeded on to Washington with the original capsule, where
    Mathison joined a delegation of top officials that presented it to Eisenhower on
    Aug. 15, along with the flag it had carried into space.
321 espionage applications: NYT, Aug. 20, 1960, p. 1 .
321 espionage conviction: Ibid.
322 Steuart Building: NRO, "The Corona Story," p. 59; "Corona Program History,
    Vol. 1: Program Overview," p. 6-1.
322 stunning new map: Jeffrey T Richelson, Americas Secret Eyes in Space: The U.S.
    Keyhole Spy Satellite Program (New York: HarperBusiness, 1990), p. 43.
322 "There was elation ": Dino Brugioni interview, Mar. 1 1 , 2002 .
322 "new era": Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell, eds., Eye in the
    Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Insti-
           tution Press, 1998), p. 221.
322 "historic importance": Andrew Goodpaster interview, Mar. 12, 2002. George
    Kistiakowsky, Eisenhower's science adviser, places the president's first viewing
    of the Corona photos the next day, August 25, before a morning meeting of the
    National Security Council. In his memoirs, Kistiakowsky obliquely refers to
    the events: "In President's office with Dulles, Killian, Land, and Gray, to show
    him certain intelligence information and remind him of certain projects related
    to SAMOS which we propose not to discuss at the following briefing but which
    influenced our recommendations." George Kistiakowsky, A Scientist at the
    White House,?. 387.
322 "more coverage": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 138.
323 plenty to examine: Dwayne Day, "The Development and Improvement of the
    Corona Satellite," in Eye in the Sky, p. 61 .
                                398          Notes


323 "not increase markedly": National Intelligence Estimate 11-8/1-61, "Strength
    and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Force," Sept. 2 1 , 1 96 1 ,
    reprinted in Corona: America's First Satellite Program, ed. Kevin Rufmer (Wash-
             ington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1995), p. 130.
323 Eisenhower lay in bed: Dino A. Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball: The Inside Story of the
    Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: Random House, 1990), p. 568.
324 "absolutely flabbergasted": Ibid.
324 Eisenhower died: Richard Helms interview, Nov. 2, 1999.


           Chapter i 5: A Stradivarius, Not a Cracker Box

326 " 'crawling along' ": Arthur Lundahl's Speech Transcript, Corona Museum
    dedication, in "Corona Program History, Vol. 2: Governmental Activities,"
    pp. 4-3 1-4-33.
326 Talent-Keyhole: Keyhole also gave rise to the technical designation of the six
    generations of Corona satellites, KH-1 through KH-4B, as well as successor
    photoreconnaissance systems, which ran up through KH-1 3 as of 2002.
326 quite a run: "Corona Program History, Vol. 2: Governmental Activities,"
    p. 4-31.
326 all twenty-five ICBM complexes: Kenneth E. Greer, "Corona," Studies in Intelli-
            gence, Supplement 17, Spring 1973; Kevin C. Rufmer, ed., Corona: Americas
    First Satellite Program (Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of Intelli-
            gence 1995), p. 37.
326 $850 million: Stephen I. Schwartz noted in a letter to the editor of the New York
    Times on Sept. 20, 1995, that John McMahon disclosed this budget number
    during the 1995 Corona conference.
326 "triumph of American technology'''': Albert D. Wheelon, "Corona: A Triumph of
    American Technology," in Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites,
    eds. Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell (Washington, D.C.:
    Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998), p. 47.
327 "our guesses were way off": Wdliam E. Burrows, Deep Black: Space Espionage and
    National Security (New York: Random House, 1986), p. vii.
327 "absolutely vital": Speech by Ronald Reagan for the 25th Anniversary of Project
    Corona, Aug. 1985, NRO.
328 invasion had begun: Jeffrey T Richelson, The Wizards ofLangley: Inside the CIAs
    Directorate of Science and Technology (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 2001), pp.
    169-170.
328 "totally useless": Albert D. Wheelon interview. Subsequent quotations from
    Wheelon in this chapter come from the same series of conversations at his
     home outside Santa Barbara, Calif., on Aug. 27-29, 1998, as well as later dis-
             cussions bytelephone in the spring of 2002.
329 "successes and regrets": Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and
    Frances T. Pudlo, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs (New
    Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 203.
                                Notes            399


329 a disservice: NTT, Feb. 8, 1994, Section D, p. 23.
331 "jewels in our crown ": James Woolsey, address at presentation of the R. V. Jones
    Intelligence Award to Albert D. Wheelon, Dec. 13, 1994.
332 steer clear of management: Jeffrey T. Richelson, Americas Secret Eyes in Space:
    The U.S. Keyhole Satellite Program (New York: HarperBusiness, 1990),
    p. 47.
332 "airplane business": Richelson, The Wizards ofLangley, p. 61 .
337 monitoring station: William Perry interview, Nov. 16, 1999.
338 "fragmentation": Donald E. Welzenbach, "Science and Technology: Origins of
    a Directorate," Studies in Intelligence, Summer 1986, pp. 24—25.
338 "the toughest job": Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, with Maggie Smith, Kelly: More
    Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,
    1989), pp. 136-137.
339 "Everything . . . had to be invented": Ibid., p. 137.
339 "its own industrial base": Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior, p. 133.
339 "anything easy ": Johnson, Kelly, p. 137.
340 "potential for problems": Ibid., pp. 139-140.
340 titanium alloy: Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works (New York: Little,
    Brown, 1994), p. 203.
340 "distilled water": Ibid., p. 2 14.
341 "Mach 2.5": Jay Miller, Lockheed Martins Skunk Works (Leicester, Eng.: Mid-
          land Publishing, 1995), p. 121.
341 "obstructing road signs "Ibid . , p . 119.
341 $3,500 in cash: Rich and Janos, Skunk Works, p. 2 18.
341 "having a heart attack": Miller, Skunk Works, p. 120.
342 pouring into the inlets: Rich and Janos, Skunk Works, p. 208.
342 at Mach 3.2: Miller, Skunk Works, p. 123.
342 "nerve-racking work": Rich and Janos, Skunk Works, p. 209.
344 different material: Sidney Drell interview, Nov. 13, 1998.
344 Drell committee: Richelson, The Wizards of Langley, p. 123.
345 discuss the tensions: Ibid., p. 112.
345 "didn V trust": Brockway McMillan interview, Mar. 26, 2002 .
346 "single point of authority": Memorandum for Director, NRO        Program A and
    NRO Program B, undated, NRO.
346 "More vigorous": Memorandum       for Director of Central Intelligence, Nov. 18,
    1963, NRO.
346 "turning point": Memorandum       for Director of Central Intelligence, Dec. 21,
    1963, NRO.
346 "enormously pleasing": Ibid.
346 "never operate reliably": Memorandum     for General Carter, CIA, June 30, 1964,
    NRO.
346 Wheelon and the CIA: Memorandum        of Agreement, Jan. 1 3, 1965, NRO.
346 "willful cancellation": Memorandum     for Deputy Director of Central Intelli-
            gence, undated, NRO.
                                     400           Notes


347   "Big Bird": Richelson, America s Secret Eyes in Space, p. 1 06.
347   "watching an NFL game ": Albert Wheelon to Richard Helms, Jan. 13,1 999.
349   "like going to the moon ": Jimmie Hill interview, Oct. 20, 1999.
349   "pushing it faster": Drell interview.
349   "Stradivarius": Ibid.
351 "last possible moment": Richard Garwin, remarks at Sidney Drell retirement cer-
              emony, Stanford University, July 31, 1998.
351 radically improve: Richelson, The Wizards of Langley, p. 172.
351 remarkable detail: Ibid. , p. 2 02 .
353 "far ahead of anything": William Perry interview.

                    Epilogue: Losing the Inventive Spark

357 its first bomb: Pakistan tested a nuclear weapon on May 30.
357 "Itoldthem": Strobe Talbott interview, Mar. 27, 2002.
358 bluffing: Frank Wisner Jr. interview, June 11, 2002.
358 slow to recognize: NYT, June 3, 1998, p. 1.
359 "imbalance ": Transcript, Jeremiah News Conference, June 2 , 1 998, CIA, http://
    www.cia.gov/cia/public_affairs/press_release/archives/1998/jeremiah.html.
359 "seriously limited ": Ibid .
360 team often: Ibid.; NYT, May 25, 1998, p. 1: Time,May25, 1998.
360 not redirected: NYT, May 25, 1998, p. 1; interviews with NIMA officials who
    asked not to be identified, June 10, 2002.
362 Richard Bissell: Richard M. Bissell Jr. letter to Anthony D. Marshall, March 14,
    1959. Provided to the author by Mr. Marshall.
362 assemble the army: The findings continued: "Several management decisions also
    likely degraded CIA's [counterterrorism] capabilities by, for example, redirect-
         ing funds earmarked for core field collection and analysis to headquarters; pay-
           ing insufficient attention to CIA's unilateral [counterterrorism] capability;
      relying too much on liaison of [counterterrorism]; and neglecting sufficient in-
                   vestment offoreign-language training and exploitation. The dramatic increase
      in resources for intelligence since 9-11 improves the outlook for CIA's [coun-
                    terterrorism] capabilities, but only if CIA management acknowledges and deals
      with the systemic problems outlined in this report." The committee recom-
                       mended: "CIA leadership must ensure that [human intelligence] collection re-
              mains a central core competency of the agency, and should develop additional
      operational tools, in conjunction with other appropriate agencies (FBI, etc.),
      penetrate terrorist cells, disrupt terrorist operations, and capture and render
      terrorists to law enforcement as appropriate. More core collectors need to be
      put on the streets." "Counterterrorism Intelligence Capabilities and Perfor-
             mance Prior to 9-1 1: A Report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives
    and the Minority Leader," Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Secu-
         rity, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, July 2002, p. ii.
363 September 12: NYT, June 20, 2002.
                                 Notes              401

363 NIMA: NIMA interviews.
365 85 percent: Ibid.
367 Space Imaging: Space Imaging was created after the Clinton administration
    lifted technical restrictions on American satellite companies in 1994, allowing
    them to build imagery systems capable of showing objects on the ground as
    small as a yard across. The government had previously permitted optical sys-
           tems that provided less detailed — and less marketable — pictures. The White
    House decision was driven by the realization that foreign satellite firms, which
    were not bound by the American limitations, could capture the potentially
    large market for higher-resolution satellite pictures and possibly sell them to
    countries or groups hostile to the United States. Though they never put
    it quite so bluntly in public, Clinton administration officials acted to give
    American companies like Space Imaging a head start in hopes that they would
    dominate the field and discourage foreign competitors from building high-
    resolution satellites. The strategy worked for a while, but foreign companies
    are now springing up. The day may soon be coming when unfriendly govern-
           ments or even terror groups will be able to use finely detailed satellite photos
    obtained from private companies to plan attacks against American targets.
367 outdated sources: NYT, May 11, 2002, p. A- 12; interviews with Space Imaging,
    Dec. 9, 1999.
368 Hellfire: NYT, Nov. 4, 2002, A-l.
369 "exaggerate the capabilities": Jimmie Hill interview, Oct. 20, 1999.
369 "bureaucratic chase": Robert Gates interview, Sept. 30, 1999.
                          BIBLIOGRAPHY



                    Interviews and Oral Histories
with Philip Taubman
Teuvo "Gus" Ahola, July 10, 1997, Honolulu, Hawaii, by telephone
Edwin "Pete" Aldridge, November 1, 1999, Roslyn, Virginia
Sam Araki, November 17, 1999, Sunnyvale, California
Harold R. "Hal" Austin, August 25-26, 1998, Riverside, California
Burton Barrett, September 21, 1999, Independence, Oregon
Stanley Beerli, September 22 and 23, 1999, Hillsboro, Oregon
Dino A. Brugioni, March 12, 2002, Hartwood, Virginia, by telephone
Merton E. Davies, August 24, 1998, Santa Monica, California
Sidney Drell, November 13, 1998, Stanford, California; March 1 5, 2000, by
   telephone
Robert Einhorn, April 3, 2002, Washington, D.C., by telephone
John W. Finney, October 21, 1999, Washington, D.C.
Lew Franklin, November 11, 1999, Stanford, California
John Gannon, April 4, 2002, Washington, D.C, by telephone
Richard Garwin, October 29, 1999, Yorktown, New York
Robert Gates, September 30, 1999, New York, New York
Andrew J. Goodpaster, November 2, 1999, Washington, D.C; January 18, 2001,
   by telephone; March 12, 2002, by telephone
Richard Helms, November 2, 1999, Washington, D.C
Charles Hill, November 3, 1999, Cambridge, Massachusetts, by telephone
Jimmie D. Hill, October 20, 1999, McLean, Virginia
Robb Hoover, October 7, 1999, Reno, Nevada
Bob Inman, December 4, 1999, Austin, Texas
Donald Kilgore, March 18, 2001, Albuquerque, New Mexico
Bob and Betty King, October 19, 1999, Washington, D.C.
Martin Knutson, November 22, 1999, Los Altos, California
Richard S. Leghorn, December 2 and 3, 1999, Silver City, New Mexico; May 30,
   2000, by telephone
John McMahon, November 12, 1999, Los Altos Hills, California; April 1, 2002, by
   telephone
Brockway McMillan, March 26, 2002, Sedgwick, Maine, by telephone
Jean O'Kelley, November 13, 1999, Napa, California
William Perry, November 16, 1999, Stanford, California
James Plummer, September 2-4, 1998, Bend, Oregon
                                      403
                         404        Bibliography


Joseph A. Ruseckas, April 7, 2001, Worcester, Massachusetts
Bernard Schriever, November 1, 1999, Washington, D.C.
George Shultz, November 15, 1999, Stanford, California
Strobe Talbott, March 27, 2002, New Haven, Connecticut, by telephone
Charles Vick, November 3, 1999, Fredericksburg, Virginia
Albert D. "Bud" Wheelon, August 27-29, 1998, Montecito, California
Harold F. "Bud" Wienberg, October 18, 2000, Folsom, California; June 4, 2000,
   by telephone
Frank Wisner Jr., June 10, 2002, New York, New York
James Woolsey, October 21, 1999, Washington, D.C.
at the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, June 10, 2002, Bethesda, Maryland:
   David H. Burpee, Robert Zitz, and other officials who did not wish to be named
at Space Imaging, Thornton, Colorado, December 9, 1999: Mark E. Brender,
   Frederick J. Doyle Jr., K. Boiling Farmer, Jeffrey Harris, Bryan McFadden, and
   MikeMcGill

with Elizabeth Goldman
Frank "Buzz" Buzard, November 17, 1999, Rancho Palos Verdes, California
Ingard Clausen, January 8, 2002, Paradise Valley, Arizona
Vincent Ford, August 4, 2000, McLean, Virginia
Willis M.Hawkins, November 15-16, 1999, Woodland Hills, California
Bill Johnson, November 9, 1999, Arnold, Maryland
William King, November 18, 1999, Pomona, California
Roy Worthington, November 16, 1999, Air Force Village, California

Columbia University Oral History Research Office, Eisenhower
Administration Project, New York, New York
Winthrop Aldrich, with David Berliner, October 16, 1972
George V Allen, with Ed Edwin, March 7, 1967
Arthur C. Lundahl, with Peter Jessup, June 10-October 8, 1981
Nathan F. Twining, with John Mason, June-September 1967

Princeton University, John Foster Dulles Oral History Project, Princeton,
New Jersey
Sherman Adams, with Richard D. Challener, August 15, 1964
Winthrop Aldrich, with Richard D. Challener, July 15, 1964
George V Allen, with Philip A. Crowl, April 7, 1966
Dillon Anderson, with Richard D. Challener, June 13, 1966
Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Richard D. Challener, September 7, 1966
Charles Pearre Cabell, with Philip A. Crowl, May 22, 1965
Dwight D. Eisenhower, with Philip A. Crowl, July 28, 1964
William C. Foster, with Philip A. Crowl, August 30, 1966
Edward L. Freers, with Philip A. Crowl, May 21, 1966
Christian Herter, with Richard D. Challener, August 3 1 , 1964
                        Bibliography                405


Curtis LeMay, by Gordon A. Craig, April 28, 1966
Neil H. McElroy, with Philip A. Crowl, May 6, 1964
Robert D. Murphy, with Richard D. Challener, June 8, 1965
Gerard C. Smith, with Philip A. Crowl, October 13, 1965
Nathan Twining, with Philip A. Crowl, March 16, 1965

Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Abilene, Kansas
Richard M. Bissell Jr., with Ed Edwin, June 5, 1967, and November 9, 1976
Charles Bohlen, with Don North, December 17, 1970
Thomas S. Gates, with John T. Mason Jr., October 3, 1972
Andrew J. Goodpaster, with Maclyn P. Burg, June 26, 1975
Gordon Gray, with Paul L. Hopper, January 23, 1967
George Kistiakowsky, with Thomas Soapes, November 17, 1976
Harold Stassen, with Thomas Soapes, April 29, 1977

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, Massachusetts
Robert Amory, with Joseph E. O'Connor, February 9, 1966
Roswell L. Gilpatric, with Dennis J. O'Brien, May 5, 1970
Roger Hilsman, with Dennis J. O'Brien, August 14, 1970
Walt Rostow, with Richard Neustadt, April 11, 1964
Theodore Sorensen, with Carl Kaysen, March 26, 1964

Lyndon B.Johnson Presidential Library, Austin, Texas
Bryce Harlow, with Michael Gillette, May 6, 1976

National Reconnaissance Office Oral History Program, Chantilly, Virginia,
all interviews by R. Cargill Hall
James G. Baker, May 9, 1996
William O. Baker, May 7, 1996
Robert John DePew, May 7, 1998
Sergei Khrushchev, July 5, 1995
Robert S. McNamara, March 25, 1999
Stacy D. Naftel, December 27, 1997
Philip O. Robertson, December 29, 1997
Don H. Schoessler and Charles P. Spoelhof, May 16, 1997

                         Archives and Libraries

Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Abilene, Kansas
Harry S Truman Presidential Library, Independence, Missouri
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, Massachusetts
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Lyndon B.Johnson Presidential Library, Austin, Texas
National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
                          406         Bibliography


National Reconnaissance Office, Chantilly, Virginia
Polaroid Corporation, corporate archives, Cambridge, Massachusetts
University of New Mexico Health Sciences Library and Informatics Center,
   Albuquerque, New Mexico

                                       Books

Ambrose, Stephen E. Eisenhower: Soldier and President. New York: Simon &
   Schuster, 1990.
         . Ikes Spies: Eisenhower and the Espionage Establishment. Garden City, N.Y.:
   Doubleday, 1981.
Andrew, Christopher M. For the Presidents Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the
   American Presidency from Washington to Bush. New York: HarperCollins
   Publishers, 1995.
Arnold, H. H. Global Mission. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1949.
Bamford, James. The Puzzle Palace: A Report on America s Most Secret Agency. New
   York: Penguin Books, 1982.
Beschloss, Michael R. Mayday: The U-2 Affair. New York: Harper & Row
   Publishers, 1986.
Bird, Kai. Color of Truth: McGeorge and William Bundy, Brothers in Arms: A
   Biography. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.
Bissell, Richard M., Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances T. Pudlo. Reflections of
   a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to Bay of Pigs. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
   Press, 1996.
Bottome, Edgar M. The Missile Gap: A Study of the Formulation of Military and
   Political Policy. Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1971.
Brian, Paul. Nuclear Holocaust: Atomic War in Fiction, 1895-1984. Kent, Ohio: Kent
   State University Press, 1987.
Brugioni, Dino A. Eyeball to Eyeball: The Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis. New
   York: Random House, 1990.
Buderi, Robert. The Invention That Changed the World: How a Small Group of Radar
   Pioneers Won the Second World War and Launched a Technological Revolution. New
   York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Bulkeley, Rip. The Sputniks Crisis and Early United States Space Policy: A Critique of
   the Historiography of Space. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Burrows, William E. By Any Means Necessary: Americas Secret Air War in the Cold
    War. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001.
      . Deep Black: Space Espionage and National Security. New York: Random
  House, 1986.
        . This New Ocean: The Story of the First Space Age. New York: Random
   House, 1998.
Byrnes, Donn A., and Kenneth D. Hurley. Blackbird Rising: Birth of an Aviation
   Legend. Los Lunas, N. Mex.: Sage Mesa Publications, 1999.
                          Bibliography                  407


Campbell, James B. Introduction to Remote Sensing, 2nd ed. New York: The Guilford
   Press, 1996.
Carmel, Hesi, ed. Intelligence for Peace: The Role of Intelligence in Times of Peace.
   London: F. Cass, 1999.
Clarke, Arthur C. Voices from the Sky: Previews of the Coming Space Age. New York:
   Harper & Row Publishers, 1965.
Coffey, Thomas M. HAP: The Story of the U.S. Air Force and the Man Who Built It,
   General Henry H. "Haf Arnold. New York: Viking Press, 1982.
Colby, William, and Peter Forbath. Honorable Men: My Life in the CIA. New York:
   Simon & Schuster, 1978.
Crickmore, Paul F. Lockheed SR-11: The Secret Missions Exposed. London: Osprey,
   1993.
Cutler, Robert. No Time for Rest. Boston: Little, Brown, 1966.
Day, Dwayne A., John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell, eds. Eye in the Sky: The Story
   of the Corona Spy Satellites. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,
   1998.
Dickson, Paul. Sputnik: The Shock of the Century. New York: Walker & Co., 2001.
Divine, Robert A. The Sputnik Challenge. New York: Oxford University Press,
   1993.
Donald, David. Spyplane. Osceola, Wis.: Motorbooks International, 1987.
Donovan, Robert J. Eisenhower: The Inside Story. New York: Harper, 1956.
Dulles, Allen. The Craft of Intelligence. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. Crusade in Europe. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1948.
      . The White House Years, 1953-56: Mandate for Change. Garden City, N.Y.:
  Doubleday, 1963.
         The White House Years, 1956-61: Waging Peace. Garden City, N.Y.:
   Doubleday, 1965.
Ferrell, Robert H., ed. The Eisenhower Diaries. New York: Norton, 1981.
Foreign Relations of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1952-54, vol. 2 and 13;
   1955-57, vol. 5,11, 19, 20, and 24; 1958-60, vol. 2, 3, and 10. Washington,
   D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Freedman, Lawrence. U.S. Intelligence and the Soviet Strategic Threat. Boulder,
   Colo.: Westview Press, 1977.
Gaddis, John Lewis, et al., eds. Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear
   Diplomacy Since 1945. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
        . The Long Peace: Inquiries into the History of the Cold War. New York: Oxford
   University Press, 1987.
      -. We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History. New York: Oxford University
  Press, 1997.
Gates, Robert M. From the Shadows: The Ultimate Insiders Story of Five Presidents
   and How They Won the Cold War. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Gavaghan, Helen. Something New Under the Sun: Satellites and the Beginning of the
   Space Age. New York: Copernicus, 1998.
                          408         Bibliography


Gavin, James M. War and Peace in the Space Age. New York: Harper, 1958.
Gertz, Bill. Betrayal: How the Clinton Administration Undermined American Security.
   Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 1999.
Goddard, George W., with DeWitt S. Copp. Overview: A Lifelong Adventure in
   Aerial Photography. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969.
Godson, Roy, ed. Intelligence Requirements for the 1980s: Analysis and Estimates.
   Washington, D.C.: National Strategy Information Center, 1980.
Graham, Richard H. SR-11 Revealed: The Inside Story. Osceola, Wis.: MBI
   Publishing, 1996.
Greenstein, Fred I. The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as Leader. Baltimore,
   Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.
Grose, Peter. Gentleman Spy: The Life of Allen Dulles. Amherst, Mass.: Amherst
   University Press, 1996.
Gunston, Bill. An Illustrated Guide to Spy Planes and Electronic Warfare Aircraft. New
   York: Arco Publishing, 1983.
Haines, Gerald K., and Robert E. Leggett, eds. CIAs Analysis of the Soviet Union,
   1941-1991, A Documentary Collection. Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the
   Study of Intelligence, 2001.
Halberstam, David. The Best and the Brightest. New York: Random House, 1972.
        . The Fifties. New York: Villard Books, 1993.
Henriksen, Margot A. Dr. Strangeloves America: Society and Culture in the Atomic
   Age. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
Heppenheimer, T. A. Countdown: A History of Space Flight. New York: John Wiley
   & Sons, 1997.
Hersh, Burton. Old Boys: The American Elite and the Origins of the CIA. New York:
   Scribner's, 1992.
Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington: U.S. Bureau of the Census,
    1975.
Hough, Harold. Satellite Surveillance. Port Townsend, Wash.: Loompanics
   Unlimited, 1991.
Immerman, Richard. The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign Policy of Intervention.
   Austin: University of Texas Press, 1982.
Jackson, Robert. High Cold War: Strategic Air Reconnaissance and the Electronic
   Intelligence War. Somerset, U.K.: Patrick Stephens, 1998.
Johnson, Clarence L. "Kelly," with Maggie Smith. Kelly: More Than My Share of It
   All. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1985.
Johnson, Loch K. Americas Secret Power: The CIA in a Democratic Society. New
   York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Jones, R. V. The Wizard War: British Scientific Intelligence, 1939-1945. New York:
   Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, 1978.
Khrushchev, Nikita, trans, and ed. Jerrold L. Schecter with Vyacheslav V. Luchkov.
   Khrushchev Remembers: The Glasnost Tapes. Boston: Little, Brown, 1990.
Khrushchev, Nikita, trans, and ed. Strobe Talbott. Khrushchev Remembers. Boston:
   Little, Brown, 1970.
                           Bibliography                   409


         . Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testament. Boston: Little, Brown, 1974.
Khrushchev, Sergei, trans, and ed. William Taubman. Khrushchev on Khrushchev:
   An Inside Account of the Man and His Era by His Son, Sergei Khrushchev. Boston:
   Little, Brown, 1990.
Killian, James R., Jr. The Education of a College President, A Memoir. Cambridge,
   Mass.: MIT Press, 1985.
         . Sputnik, Scientists and Eisenhower: A Memoir of the First Special Assistant to
   the President for Science and Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977.
Kistiakowsky, George. A Scientist at the White House: A Private Diary of President
   Eisenhowers Special Assistant for Science and Technology. Cambridge, Mass.:
   Harvard University Press, 1976.
Klass, Philip. Secret Sentries in Space. New York: Random House, 197 1 .
LaQueur, Walter. The Uses and Limits of Intelligence. New Brunswick, N.J.:
   Transaction Publishers, 1993.
Lashmar, Paul. Spy Flights of the Cold War. London: Sutton Publishing, 1996.
Launius, Roger D., and Howard E. McCurdy, eds. Spaceflight and the Myth of
   Presidential Leadership. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997.
LeFeber, Walter. America, Russia and the Cold War, 1945-1996, 8th ed. New York:
   McGraw-Hill, 1997.
LeMay, Curtis E., with MacKinlay Kantor. Mission with LeMay: My Story. Garden
   City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965.
Lewis, Jonathan E. Spy Capitalism: Itek and the CIA. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
   University Press, 2002.
Lindgren, David T. Trust but Verify: Imagery Analysis in the Cold War. Annapolis,
   Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2000.
Logsdon, John M., ed. Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of
   the U.S. Civil Space Program, vol. 1 and 2. Washington, D.C.: NASA, 1995.
Manchester, Harland. New World of Machines. New York: Random House,
   1945.
Marchetti, Victor, and John D. Marks. The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence. New
   York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1974.
McCullough, David G. Truman. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
McDonald, Robert A., ed. Corona: Between the Sun and the Earth — The First NRO
   Reconnaissance Eye in Space. Bethesda, Md.: American Society for
   Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997.
McDougall, Walter A. . . . The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space
   Age. New York: Basic Books, 1985.
McElheny, Victor K. Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin Land, Inventor of
   Instant Photography. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1999.
Miller, Jay. Lockheed Martins Skunk Works. Leicester, U.K.: Midland Publishing,
    1995.
        . Lockheed U-2. Austin, Tex.: Aero fax, 1983.
Naimark, Norman. The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of
   Occupation, 1945-1949. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995.
                           410         Bibliography


Ordway, Frederick L, III, and Mitchell Sharpe. The Rocket Team. New York:
   Crowell, 1979.
O'Shaker, Mark. The Polaroid Story. New York: Stein and Day, 1978.
O'Toole, G.J. A. Honorable Treachery: A History of U.S. Intelligence, Espionage and
   Covert Action from the American Revolution to the CIA. New York: Atlantic
   Monthly Press, 1991.
Patton, Phil. Dreamland: Travels in the Secret World of Rosw ell and Area 51. New
   York: Villard Books, 1998.
Pedlow, Gregory W., and Donald E. Welzenbach. The CIA and the U-2 Program,
   1954-1914. Langley, Va.: Central Intelligence Agency, 1998.
Peebles, Curtis. Battle for Space. New York: Beaufort Books, 1983.
        . The Corona Project: Americas First Spy Satellites. Annapolis, Md.: Naval
   Institute Press, 1997.
          Dark Eagles: A History of Top Secret U.S. Aircraft Programs. Novato, Calif.:
   Presidio Press, 1995.
        . Guardians: Strategic Reconnaissance Satellites. Novato, Calif.: Presidio Press,
   1987.
       . The Moby Dick Project: Reconnaissance Balloons Over Russia. Washington,
  D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991.
Pocock, Chris. Dragon Lady: The History of the U-2 Spyplane. Osceola, Wis.:
   Motorbooks International, 1989.
       . The U-2 Spyplane: Toward the Unknown. Atglen, Pa.: Schiffer Publishing,
  2000.
Polmar, Norman. Spyplane: The U-2 History Declassified. Osceola, Wis.: MBI
   Publishing, 2001.
Power, Thomas. The Man Who Kept the Secrets: Richard Helms and the CIA. New
   York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979.
Powers, Francis Gary, with Curt Gentry. Operation Overflight: The U-2 Pilot Tells
   His Story for the First Time. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970.
Prados, John. Keepers of the Keys: A History of the National Security Council from
   Truman to Bush. New York: Morrow, 1991.
        . The Soviet Estimate: U.S. Intelligence Analysis and Russian Military Strength.
   New York: Dial Press, 1982.
Ranelagh, John. The Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA. New York: Simon &
   Schuster, 1986.
Reeves, Richard. President Kennedy: Profile of Power. New York: Simon & Schuster,
   1993.
Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Simon &
   Schuster, 1995.
        . The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1986.
Rich, Ben R., and Leojanos. Skunk Works. New York: Little, Brown, 1994.
Richelson, Jeffrey T. American Espionage and the Soviet Target. New York: William
   Morrow, 1987.
                          Bibliography                   411


       . America's Secret Eyes in Space: The U.S. Keyhole Spy Satellite Program. New
  York: HarperBusiness, 1990.
       . America s Space Sentinels: DSP Satellites and National Security. Lawrence:
  University Press of Kansas, 1999.
       . A Century of Spies: Intelligence in the Twentieth Century. New York: Oxford
  University Press, 1995.
       . The U.S. Intelligence Community, 3rd ed. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press,
  1995.
         . The Wizards ofLangley: Inside the CIAs Directorate of Science and Technology.
   Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 2001.
Rostow, W. W. Open Skies: Eisenhowers Proposal of July 21, 1955. Austin: University
   of Texas Press, 1982.
Ruffher, Kevin C, ed. Corona: Americas First Satellite Program. Washington, D.C.:
   CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1995.
Sagdeev, R. Z. The Making of a Soviet Scientist: My Adventures in Nuclear Fusion and
   Space from Stalin to Star Wars. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
Sakharov, Andrei. Memoirs. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1990.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House.
   Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965.
Smith, R. Harris. OSS: The Secret History of Americas First Central Intelligence
   Agency. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.
Sontag, Sherry, and Christopher Drew. Blind Mans Bluff: The Untold Story of
   American Submarine Espionage. Thorndike, Maine: Thorndike Press, 1999.
Sorensen, Theodore C. Kennedy. New York: Harper & Row, 1965.
Spidle, Jake W, Jr. Doctors of Medicine in New Mexico: A History of Health and
   Medical Practice, 1886-1986. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
    1986.
        . The Lovelace Medical Center: Pioneer in American Health Care. Albuquerque:
   University of New Mexico Press, 1987.
Srodes, James. Allen Dulles: Master of Spies. Washington, D.C.: Regnery
   Publishing, 1999.
Stares, Paul B. The Militarization of Space: U.S. Policy, 1945-1984. Ithaca, N. Y:
   Cornell University Press, 1985.
          . Space and National Security. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1987.
Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1954. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the
    Census, 1954.
Steury, Donald. Sherman Kent and the Board of National Estimates: Collected Essays.
   Washington, D.C.: CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1994.
Sturm, Thomas A. The USAF Scientific Advisory Board: Its First Twenty Years,
    1944-1964. Washington, D.C.: USAJF Historical Division Liaison Office,
    1967.
Taylor, John W R., and David Mondey. Spies in the Sky. New York: Scribner,
   1972.
                          412          Bibliography


Thomas, Evan. The Very Best Men: Four Who Dared: The Early Years of the CIA. New
   York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Thornborough, Anthony M., and Peter E. Davies. Lockheed Blackbirds. Surrey,
   U.K.: Ian Allan, 1988.
Twining, Nathan F. Neither Liberty nor Safety: A Hard Look at U.S. Military Policy
   and Strategy. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1966.
Van der Aart, Dick. Aerial Espionage: Secret Intelligence Flights by East and West. New
   York: Arco/Prentice Hall Press, 1985.
Welzenbach, Donald E., draft of unpublished manuscript.
Wensberg, Peter. Lands Polaroid. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
White, Ken. World in Peril: The Origin, Mission and Scientific Findings of the
   46th '/72nd Reconnaissance Squadron. Elkhart, Ind.: K. W. White and Associates,
   1994.
White, William L. The Little Toy Dog: The Story of the Two RB-47 Flyers, Captain
  John R. McKone and Captain Freeman B. Olmstead. New York: E. P. Dutton,
   1962.
Wise, David, and Thomas B. Ross. The Invisible Government. New York: Random
   House, 1964.
        . The U -2 Affair. New York: Random House, 1962.
Wolfe, Tom. The Right Stuff. Thorndike, Maine: Thorndike Press, 1979.
Wyden, Peter. The Bay of Pigs: The Untold Story. New York: Simon & Schuster,
   1979.
Yost, Graham. Spies in the Sky. New York: Facts on File, 1989.
         . Spy-Tech. New York: Facts on File, 1985.
Zachary, G. Pascal. Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the American
   Century. New York: Free Press, 1997.
Zaloga, Steven J. Target America: The Soviet Union and the Strategic Arms Race,
   1945-1964. Novato, Calif.: Presidio Press, 1993.
Ziegler, Charles A., and David Jacobson. Spying without Spies: Origins of Americas
   Secret Nuclear Surveillance System. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1995.

                                      Reports

Clauser, F. H., et al. Preliminary Design of an Experimental World-Circling Spaceship,
   SM-1 1827. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp., May 2, 1946.
Corona Program History, Vol. 1-4, Directorate of Science and Technology, Central
   Intelligence Agency, May 19, 1976.
Davies, Merton E., and William R. Harris. RANDs Role in the Evolution of Balloon
   and Satellite Observation Systems and Related U.S. Space Technology, R-3692-RC.
   Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp., 1988.
Davies, Merton E., and Amrom H. Katz, et al. A Family of Recoverable
   Reconnaissance Satellites, RM-2012. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp.,
   November 12, 1957.
George, Alexander L. Case Studies of Actual and Alleged Overflights, 1930-1953, with
                          Bibliography                    413


  Supplement, RM-1349. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND            Corp., August 15,
  1955.
       . Diplomatic Aspects of Soviet Air-Defense Policy, 1950-1953, RM-1347. Santa
  Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp., October 15, 1954.
       .Intelligence Value of Soviet Notes on Air Incidents, 1950-1953, RM-1348.
  Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp, October 15, 1954.
         Soviet Reactions to Border Flights and Overflights in Peacetime, RM- 1 346.
   Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp, October 15, 1954.
Greenfield, S. M, and W. W. Kellogg. Inquiry into the Feasibility of Weather
   Reconnaissance from a Satellite Vehicle, R-2 18. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND
   Corp, 1951.
Hall, R. Cargill. A History of the Military Polar Orbiting Meteorological Satellite
   Program. Chantilly, Va.: National Reconnaissance Office, September 2001.
Handler, Joshua. Russian Nuclear Warhead Dismantlement Rates and Storage Site
  Capacity: Implications for the Implementation of START II and De-alerting
  Initiatives, CEES Report No. AC-99-01. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University,
  1999.
Huntzicker, J. H, and H. A. Lieske. Physical Recovery of Satellite Payloads — A
   Preliminary Investigation, RM-181 1. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp,
   June 26, 1956.
Katz, Amrom H, ed. Selected Readings in Aerial Reconnaissance: A Reissue of a
   Collection of Papers from 1946 and 1948, RAND P-2762. Santa Monica, Calif.:
   The RAND Corp, August 1963.
Lipp, J. E, et al. Reference Papers Relating to a Satellite Study, RA 15032. Santa
   Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp, 1947.
      . Utility of a Satellite Vehicle for Reconnaissance, R-2 17. Santa Monica, Calif.:
  The RAND Corp, 1951.
Lipp, J. E, and R. M. Salter, eds. Project Feed Back Summary Report, R-2 62. Santa
   Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp, March 1, 1954.
Polaroid Corporation Annual Report, 1952.
Polaroid Corporation Annual Report, 1953.
The RAND Corporation: 40th Year. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp,
   1988.
Reference Volume Three: Stereoscopic Photography, Polaroid Corporate Archives, 1984.
Richelson, Jeffrey T U.S. Satellite Imagery, 1960-1999. National Security Archive
   Electronic Briefing Book No. 13, April 14, 1999;
   http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB 1 3/index.html.
Wohlstetter, A.J, et al. Selection and Use of Strategic Air Bases, R-2 66. Santa
   Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp, June 1962.
       . Vulnerability of U.S. Strategic Air Power to a Surprise Enemy Attack in 1956,
   SM-15. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corp, April 15, 1953.
                         414        Bibliography


                                   Articles

Aviation Week & Space Technology, 1950-2002.
The New York Times, 1950-2002.

"Eastman Kodak Company Designed the Camera that Delivers the Images."
  Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, January 2000.
"Fairchild Brings the CCD to Market." Business Week, March 24, 1973.
"Fighting the Feds Over Shutter Control." Communicator, December 1999.
"Is Russia Winning the Arms Race?" U.S. News & World Report, June 18, 1954.
"Land Satellite Information in the Next Decade: Plans for Thirty-Meter
   Resolution or Better Land Observation Satellites." Collected for 1995 American
   Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Conference.
"Leveraging the Infosphere: Surveillance and Reconnaissance in 2020." Airpower
  Journal.
"Observing the Satellites." Sky & Telescope, April 1960.
"PFIAB: An Historical and Contemporary Analysis, 1955-1975." Congressional
   Research Service.
"Polar Sky Spies." Time, December 15, 1958.
"Red Air Force: The World's Biggest." Newsweek, August 23, 1954.
"Taking a Look Back at Project Feed Back." RAND Newsletter.

Amelio, Gilbert F. "Charge-Coupled Devices." Scientific American, February 1974.
Austin, Harold. "A Cold War Overflight of the USSR." Daedalus Flyer, Spring
   1995.
Behling, Thomas, and Kenneth McGruther. "Planning Satellite Reconnaissance to
   Support Military Operations." Studies in Intelligence, Winter 1998-99.
Brugioni, Dino A. "The Art and Science of Photoreconnaissance." Scientific
   American, March 1996.
         . "The Unidentifieds." Studies in Intelligence, Summer 1969.
Brugioni, Dino A., and Robert F. McCort. "British Honors for Lundahl." Studies in
   Intelligence, Spring 1975.
Burnham, James. "Intelligence on Cuba." National Review, November 20, 1962.
Burrows, William E.. "Beyond the Iron Curtain." Air and Space, December 1998.
        . "The Coldest Warriors." Air and Space, December 1999.
        . "How the Skunk Works Works:' Air and Space, April 1994.
        . "Imaging Space Reconnaissance Operations During the Cold War: Cause,
   Effect and Legacy." http://webster.hibo.no/asf/Cold-War/reportl/williame
   .html.
         . "The Oxcart Cometh." Air and Space, February 1999.
         . "That New Black Magic. " Air and Space, December 1998.
Cain, John W "Technical Factors in Aerospace Photography." Studies in
   Intelligence, Fall 1962.
                         Bibliography                  415


Clark, Keith. "On Warning." Studies in Intelligence, Winter 1965.
Daso, Dik. "Origins of Airpower: Hap Arnold's Early Career in Aviation
   Technology, 1903-1935 ." Airpower Journal, Winter 1996.
        . "Origins of Airpower: Hap Arnold's Command Years and Aviation
   Technology, 1936-1945." Airpower Journal, Fall 1997.
Day, Dwayne A. "Big Black and Small Satellites: Comparing NASA and NRO."
   Space Times 38, no. 5, Sept.-Oct. 1999.
        . "Listening from Above: The First Signals Intelligence Satellite."
   Spaceflight 41, no. 8, Aug. 1999.
         'Mapping the Dark Side of the World Part 1 : The KH-5 ARGON
  Geodetic Satellite." Spaceflight 40, no. 7, July 1998.
         "Mapping the Dark Side of the World Part 2: Secret Geodetic
  Programmes After ARGON." Spaceflight 40, no. 8, Aug. 1998.
       . "Medium Metal: The NRO's Smaller Satellites." Spaceflight 42, no. 1, Jan.
  2000.
       . "Rashomon in Space: A Short Review of Official Spy Satellite Histories."
  Quest 8, no. 2, Summer 2000.
        . "Relics of the Space Race: Space Archaeology of Vandenberg Air Force
   Base, Part 1." Spaceflight 42, no. 2, Feb. 2000.
        . "Relics of the Space Race: Space Archaeology of Vandenberg Air Force
   Base, Part 2." Spaceflight 42, no. 3, Mar. 2000.
Dourgarian, Jim. "Test Pilot Seeks Beauty During Flight or at Home." Daily
   Review (Burbank, Calif.), Oct. 12, 1970.
Drell, Sidney D. "Physics and U.S. National Security." Reviews of Modern Physics,
   April 17, 1998.
Dulles, John Foster. "A Policy of Boldness." Life, May 19, 1952.
Eberhart, Jonathan. "The CCD: New Eye on the Sky." Science News, March 12,
   1977.
Edwards, Philip K. "The President's Board: 1956-1960." Studies in Intelligence,
   Summer 1969.
Elliott, Richard G. "On a Comet, Always: A Biography of Dr. W. Randolph
   Lovelace II." New Mexico Quarterly 36, no. 4.
Fenton, Ben. "U.S. Spying Balloons Were Based in Britain." Daily Telegraph
   London, Aug. 10, 1998.
Flax, Alexander, and Ivan Getting. "Allen F. Donovan: 1914-1995." In Memorial
   Tributes: National Academy of Engineering, vol. 8, 1996.
Florini, A. M., and Y. Dehqanzada. "Commercial Satellite Imagery Comes of
   Age." Issues in Science and Technology, Fall 1999.
Garwin, Richard L., Kurt Gottfield, and Donald L. Harrier. "Antisatellite
   Weapons." Scientific American 250, no. 6, June 1984.
Glines, C. V. "Billy Mitchell: Air Power Visionary." Aviation History, Sept. 1997.
Grabo, Cynthia M. "Strategic Warning: The Problem of Timing." Studies in
   Intelligence, Spring 1972.
                         416         Bibliography


Greenwood, Ted. "Reconnaissance and Arms Control." Scientific American 288, no.
  2, Feb. 1973.
Grundhauser, Larry. "Sentinels Rising: Commercial High-Resolution Satellite
   Imagery and Its Implications for U.S. National Security ." Airpower Journal,
  Winter 1998.
Hafemeister, David, Joseph J. Romm, and Kosta Tsipis. "The Verification of
   Compliance with Arms-Control Agreements." Scientific American 252, no. 3,
   March 1985.
Hall, Keith R. "The National Reconnaissance Office: Revolutionizing Global
   Reconnaissance." Defense Intelligence Journal 8, no. 1, Summer 1999.
Hall, R. Cargill. "The Eisenhower Administration and the Cold War: Framing
   American Astronautics to Serve National Security." Prologue 27, no. 1, Spring
   1995.

       . "From Concept to National Policy: Strategic Reconnaissance in the Cold
  War." Prologue, Summer 1996.
       . "Missile Defense Alarm: The Genesis of Space-Based Infrared Early
  Warning." Quest 7, no. 1, Spring 1999.
       . "The National Reconnaissance Office: A Brief History of Its Creation and
  Evolution." Space Times, March-April 1999.
       . "Origins and Development of the Vanguard and Explorer Satellite
  Programs." Air Power Historian, October 1964.
       . "Strategic Reconnaissance in the Cold War." Prologue, Summer 1996, p.
  107.
         . "The Truth About Overflights: Military Reconnaissance Missions over
   Russia Before the U-2." Quarterly Journal of Military History, Spring 1997.
Handler, Joshua. "Lifting the Lid on Russia's Nuclear Weapon Storage. "Janes
   Intelligence Review 11, no. 8, Aug. 1, 1999.
Herseyjohn. "Hiroshima." The New Yorker, Aug. 31, 1946.
Hillman, Donald E., with R. Cargill Hall. "Overflight: Strategic Reconnaissance of
   the USSR." Air Power Historian, Spring 1996.
Kennan, George P. "The Sources of Soviet Conduct." Foreign Affairs 2 5, July 1947.
Knebel, Fletcher. "Washington in Crisis: 154 Hours on the Brink of War." Look,
   Dec. 18, 1962.
Lawrence, R. E., and Harry W Woo. "Infrared Imagery in Overhead
   Reconnaissance." Studies in Intelligence, Summer 1967.
Loeb, Vernon. "At CIA Tribute, the U-2 Flies Out of the Cold War's Long
   Shadows." Washington Post, Sept. 18, 1998.
Long, Lewis R. "Concepts for a Philosophy of Air Intelligence." Studies in
   Intelligence, Winter 1958.
Mathews, Charles W "Technical Intelligence and Arms Inspection." Studies in
  Intelligence, Fall 1957.
McDonald, Robert A. "Corona: Success for Space Reconnaissance, a Look into the
  Cold War and a Revolution for Intelligence." Photogrammetric Engineering and
  Remote Sensing, June 1 999.
                         Bibliography                  417


Mclninch, Thomas P. "The Oxcart Story." Air Force Magazine, Nov. 1994.
Orlov, Alexander. "The U-2 Program: A Russian Officer Remembers." Studies in
   Intelligence, Winter 1998-99.
Pinson, Ernest A. "A Tribute to Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II." New Mexico
   Quarterly 36, no. 4, 1966.
Raloff, Janet. "CCDs: Astronomy's Superchips." Science News 1 14, no. 9, Aug. 26,
   1978.
Richelson, Jeffrey T "Out of the Black: The Disclosure and Declassification of the
   National Reconnaissance Office." International Journal of Intelligence and
   Counterintelligence 11, no. 1, Spring 1998.
Ruffher, Kevin C. "Declassification's Great Leap Forward: Corona and the
   Intelligence Community." Studies in Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 5, 1996.
Shulman, Seth. "Code Name: Corona." Technology Review, Oct. 1996.
Smith, F. Dow. "The Eyes of Corona: The World's First Satellite Reconnaissance
   Program." Optics & Photonics News, Oct. 1995.
Stanglin, Douglas, Susan Headden, and Peter Cary. "Flights of the Ferrets:
   Decades Later, Many of the Spy Missions Are Still Shrouded in Secrecy." U.S.
   News & World Report, Mar. 15, 1993.
Tarlofsky, Malcolm. "The Code War." Washington Post Magazine, May 10, 1998.
Tenet, George J. "The U-2 Program: The DCFs Perspective." Studies in
   Intelligence, Winter 1998-99.
Thompson, Tom. "Charge-Coupled Devices." Computerworld, Aug. 6, 2001.
Vick, Charles P. "Why the Soviets Never Beat the U.S. to the Moon." 21st Century
   Science and Technology, Fall 1997.
Walsh, Maj. Gen. James H. "Strategic Thinking and Air Intelligence." Studies in
   Intelligence, Winter 1958.
Welzenbach, Donald E. "Din Land: Patriot from Polaroid." Optics & Photonics
  News, October 1994.
        . "Observation Balloons and Reconnaissance Satellites." Studies in
  Intelligence, Summer 1986.
      . "Science and Technology: Origins of a Directorate." Studies in Intelligence,
  Summer 1986.
Wheelon, Albert D. "Corona: The First Reconnaissance Satellites." Physics Today
   50, no. 2, Feb. 1997.
Wheelon, Albert D., and Sidney N. Graybeal. "Intelligence for the Space Race."
  Studies in Intelligence, Fall 1961.
Wilson, Jim. "Skunk Works Magic: How a Handful of Men Broke the Rules and
   Created the World's Most Amazing High-Tech Weaponry." Popular Mechanics,
   Sept. 1999.
Wolfe, Frank. "NRO: Commercial, Military Satellite Gap Will Narrow." Defense
   Daily, May 26, 1998.
                         418        Bibliography


           Speeches, Correspondence, Pamphlets, Videos

CBS Evening News, "Support to the Military," Feb. 2, 1998; "NRO: Eye on
   America," Feb. 4, 1998; "NIMA: Eye on America," Feb. 5, 1998.
"Corona Teamwork and Technology," video, National Reconnaissance Office.
Drell, Sidney. "Physics and U.S. National Security," presented at Stanford Linear
   Accelerator Center, Stanford, Calif., Apr. 17, 1998.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. "Chance for Peace," before the American Society of
   Newspaper Editors, Apr. 16, 1953.
"Fallout Shelter Surveys: Guide for Executives," Department of Defense, October
   1959.
Franklin, Lewis R. "Recommendation of Dr. William Perry for the 1998 RV Jones
   Intelligence Award," Aug. 22, 1998.
Garwin, Richard L. "Corona: America's First Reconnaissance Satellite System, a
   View from the Land Panel," panel on "Developing Corona — Its Technical
   Problems, Improvements and Victories," at "Piercing the Curtain: CORONA
   and the Revolution in Intelligence," conference sponsored by CIA Center for
   the Study of Intelligence, May 24, 1995, Washington, D.C.
       . "Remarks for RV Jones Award Dinner," Mar. 12, 1996.
       . "Sidney Drell and National Security," July 31, 1998.
       . "Working Together in Intelligence: Can We Make the Whole More than
  the Sum of Its Parts?" SES Seminar on the Occasion of the RV Jones Award,
  Mar. 12, 1996.
Hallion, Richard P. "Aerospace Medicine Nears the Millennium: Adaptation,
   Anticipation and Advancement," before the Aerospace Medical Association,
   May 17, 1999.
Land, Edwin. Commencement address at the Massachusetts Institute of
   Technology, 1960.
Lashmar, Paul. "Spyflights of the Cold War," at Kingston University, Mar. 12,
   1997.
Latell, Brian. "CIA and the New Era of Openness," at Harvard University, Dec. 2,
    1994.
Leghorn, Richard S. "Objectives for Research and Development in Military Aerial
   Reconnaissance," at opening ceremonies of Boston University Optical Research
   Laboratory, Dec. 13, 1946.
McMahon, John. "Corona: The First Satellite Reconnaissance System," at
   "Piercing the Curtain: CORONA and the Revolution in Intelligence,"
   conference sponsored by CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, May 24,
   1995, Washington, D.C.
Proceedings of U-2 History Symposium, National Defense University,
   Washington, D.C, Sept. 17, 1998.
"Secret Satellite," video, National Reconnaissance Office.
"Spies Above: National Photographic Interpretation Center," video, National
   Reconnaissance Office.
                         Bibliography                 419


"Spy in the Sky," transcript of documentary aired on The American Experience,
   PBS.
Wheelon, Albert D. Correspondence, 1999.
       . "Strategic Reconnaissance," speech before the American Physical Society,
  Mar. 24, 1999.
Woolsey, James R. "Remarks in Honor of Dr. Albert D. Wheelon," RV Jones
   Intelligence Award, Dec. 13, 1994.
                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




 A confluence of fortuitous factors made this book possible, be-
IX. ginning with the government's declassification in the mid- 1 990s of
voluminous materials related to the technological breakthroughs that
vaulted American spying into the stratosphere and outer space during
the early years of the cold war. That, in turn, freed the men and women
who worked on these programs to talk about them publicly for the first
time, ending decades of silence. I was fortunate to delve into these mat-
     ters as a torrent of previously undisclosed information became available
to scholars and journalists, illuminating a heroic and untold chapter in
American history.
   In doing so, I had the assistance of an extraordinarily dedicated and
talented research assistant, Elizabeth Goldman. Elizabeth, who signed
up for this project after graduating with a history degree from Stanford,
worked alongside me for three years, gathering, organizing, and mining
thousands of pages of recently declassified documents. She designed
and maintained an electronic database to store and sort the information,
spent weeks at a number of presidential libraries, produced countless
reports on various pieces of the story, conducted interviews, attended
historical conferences, checked hundreds of facts, and did a masterful
job of managing the endnotes. She was my indispensable partner in this
endeavor.

   The gateway to this book was opened by the government's decision
to unseal secret archives of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Na-
       tional Reconnaissance Office. The initial impulse for that decision came
from Robert M. Gates during the time he served as director of Central
Intelligence. It was advanced by those who followed him, including
James Woolsey and John Deutch, and consummated in 1995 by Presi-
     dent Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore when they ordered the de-
               clas ification ofthe nation's first reconnaissance satellite system, the
                                        421
                     422         Acknowledgments


Corona. There is nothing more important to the health of a democracy
than letting sunlight pour into the inner historical sanctums of secret
organizations like the CIA and NRO, and nothing that is more difficult
to do because of the traditions of those organizations. George Tenet,
the present director of Central Intelligence, continued the declassifica-
     tion process in September 2002 with the publication of imagery from
the second generation of spy satellites. The CIA's Center for the Study
of Intelligence has played a vital role in translating declassification deci-
      sions into reality.
  Many of the people who played critical roles in the development and
operation of revolutionary new spying tools like the U-2 and SR-71
spy planes and the Corona photoreconnaissance satellite system shared
their recollections with me. Many of them were extraordinarily gener-
     ous with their time, welcoming me into their homes for hours of inter-
             viewing that frequently extended over several days. For me, these visits
were a journey back to an era — the Eisenhower presidency — that I had
experienced as a boy, a time of high tension in the cold war that was con-
        densed in my childhood memory as a series of scary crises in faraway
places such as the Korean Peninsula and Berlin and more immediate re-
       alities like the fallout shelters that appeared in my neighborhood in
New York City. In recent years, as I sat in the kitchens, dens, and living
rooms of the spies, scientists, pilots, top government officials, and cor-
      porate executives who worked so hard to preserve American security in
the 1950s, I was given a guided tour through an intricate and remark-
     able secret history of that period.
   I am grateful for the patience and cooperation of these men and
women. Most of them are identified in the list of interviews that accom-
        panies this story. Some, who remain involved in government work or
discussed operations that remain secret today, asked not to be identified.
A number of actors in this story extended a helpful hand to me through-
    out this project, and I owe them special thanks. Sidney Drell, the former
deputy director of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center and a long-
      time government consultant on intelligence technologies, offered sage
counsel, technical expertise, and even a place to stay during research
trips to the Bay Area. Little did I know as a Stanford undergraduate in
                    Acknowledgments                     423


the late 1960s, when we first met, that Professor Drell was immersed in

some of the government's most secret spy projects. Gen. Andrew J.
Goodpaster, D wight D. Eisenhower's staff secretary at the White
House, repeatedly reached back into his encyclopedic memory on my
behalf. Katherine Schneider, who helped organize the public unveiling
of the Corona program in 1995, pointed me toward many of the pio-
      neers who created the first satellites, and her enthusiasm for their story
was contagious. Adm. Bobby Inman, a former director of the National
Security Agency and deputy director of Central Intelligence, has ex-
          plained innumerable matters to me over the years about the intelligence
kingdom. He helped me decipher the institutional feuds that grew out
of the development of powerful new espionage technologies.
   I also benefited greatly from pioneering historical and journalistic
work in this field. Long before most Americans had ever heard of a spy
satellite, and years before government archives were opened, Philip J.
Klass and William E. Burrows wrote exceptionally well informed books
about America's secret intelligence programs. Jeffrey T. Richelson, a
senior fellow with the National Security Archive, has produced a series
of exquisitely detailed books about spy satellites and other intelligence
matters, drawing on years of painstaking research and a sustained effort
to obtain documents under the Freedom of Information Act. Dwayne
A. Day, another resourceful scholar, has scoured the archives and played
a vital role in assembling and analyzing the historical record. John Logs-
don, director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington Uni-
         versity, Brian Latell, former director of the CIA's Center for the Study
of Intelligence and now an adjunct professor at Georgetown University,
and Robert A. McDonald, who edited a valuable compendium of infor-
         mation about the Corona satellite system, helped bring these records to
light. Chris Pocock, a British writer, did groundbreaking work on the
U-2. Donald E. Welzenbach, who worked for many years as a historian
at the CIA and was coauthor of a secret history of the U-2 that was de-
          clas ified in1998, graciously shared information and insights with me.
R. Cargill Hall, who has chronicled the evolution of overhead recon-
           nais ance as a historian for the Air Force and more recently the Na-
       tional Reconnaissance Office, provided me with a steady stream of
                   424        Acknowledgments


invaluable documents and interview transcripts as they became declassi-
      fied. Mr. Welzenbach and Mr. Hall also reviewed the chapters on the
U-2 and Corona, catching innumerable factual errors. I am solely re-
           sponsible for any that may remain.
   Elizabeth Goldman would like to thank the many librarians and
archivists who made her work possible, including the staffs of the Harry
S Truman Library; the D wight D. Eisenhower Library, particularly
Barbara Constable; the John F. Kennedy Library; the Lyndon B.John-
    son Library; the National Archives and Records Administration; the Li-
       brary ofCongress; the National Reconnaissance Office Reading Room;
the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Library; the Polaroid
Corporation archives; the Columbia University Oral History Research
Office; the John Foster Dulles Oral History Collection at Princeton
University; the Space Policy Institute at George Washington Univer-
     sity; the CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence; and the Washington
bureaus of the New York Times and Aviation Week & Space Technology.
Robb Hoover provided introductions to pilots at the annual birthday
ball of the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing. And thanks to Juan
Perez-Mercader for checking our accuracy on technical points and to
Joshua Handler for extracting Corona photographs from the volumi-
      nous collection at the National Archives and getting them to us in a
usable format.
  Critical financial support for this project came from the Carnegie
Corporation of New York, thanks to the encouragement of Vartan Gre-
       gorian and David C. Speedie. David Hamburg, former president of the
corporation, was one of the first people to urge me to tell this history.
Ted Mitchell and John Bak at Occidental College kindly took me on as a
senior fellow of the college. The Hoover Institution at Stanford Uni-
        versity also provided research assistance under the direction of John
Raisian and Thomas H. Henriksen. The Hertog Research Assistant-
ships of the School of the Arts at Columbia University assigned Adam
Beroud, an enterprising graduate student, to help me with research.
Arianne Chernock also assisted with research.
  My colleagues at the New York Times gave me constant support. I am
especially grateful to Arthur Sulzberger Jr., Howell Raines, Gail
                   Acknowledgments                   425


Collins, and Philip M. Boffey, who afforded me the time to work on the
book, including a five-month leave from my duties at the editorial page.
William J. Broad's knowledgeable reporting about many of the matters
discussed in these pages first turned my attention to the declassification
of the Corona program and informed my research. Christopher Drew,
who with Sherry Sontag chronicled the story of America's submarine
espionage in Blind Man s Bluff, spurred me on whenever my batteries
started to run down. Jeff Gerth and Janice O'Connell opened their
home to me during research trips to Washington, and Jeff peppered me
with good suggestions and reporting tips, reminding me of the adven-
      tures we shared in the early 1980s when we were tracking the activities
of a pair of renegade CIA officers, Edwin Wilson and Frank Terpil.
Were it not for Bill Kovach, who unexpectedly assigned me to the spy
beat in 1979 when he was the Times's Washington bureau chief, I would
never have traversed the path that led to this book.
   Any book is in some fundamental way a collaboration between writer
and editor, and I was fortunate to work with Alice Mayhew at Simon &
Schuster, who is one of the best in the business. Alice and I first started
talking about books in the mid-1980s, when I was reporting for the
Times in Washington and preparing for an assignment in Moscow. She
waited patiently for me to come up with a proposal that I could execute,
and from our initial conversation about this project in 1998, she has
provided wise advice, astute editing, and unflagging encouragement.
Roger Labrie of Simon & Schuster walked me through the editing
process with many fine suggestions about how to improve the book.
Getting this project off the ground and bringing it to readers would
have been impossible without the help of my agent, Amanda Urban,
who has been both adviser and friend since we worked for Clay Felker at
Esquire in the late 1970s.
   My wife, Felicity Barringer, and our sons, Michael and Gregory, have
every right to think of this book as a family enterprise. Their support
and patience were invaluable. I long ago lost count of the weekends
when I disappeared behind my desk to work on the project, not to men-
     tion the vacations sacrificed to research and writing. They accepted my
obsession with grace and good humor. They were also excellent editors
                  426       Acknowledgments


and critics. My brother, William Taubman, who was working in parallel
on his own book, a biography of Nikita Khrushchev, helped to keep my
spirits high and always made himself available to field my questions
about the cold war. I regret that our parents, Howard and Nora, are not
here to see the nearly simultaneous publication of our books. As people
who were devoted to the written word, and taught us much about the
importance of history, I'm sure they would have been pleased and
proud.

New York City
December 2002
                                        INDEX

Page numbers beginning with 371 refer to notes.

ablation cooling, 225                                  missile programs of, 197-99, 201, 206,
Acheson, Dean, 19                                         219,251,275,335
Adams, Sherman, 214, 217, 310                          reconnaissance planes of, 3-10, 32,
Adenauer, Konrad, 181, 182                                48-49, 72, 105, 146, 343; see also
Ad Hoc Requirements Committee, 183,                       aerial reconnaissance; U-2 spy plane
     281                                               satellite development of, 32, 63-65,
Advanced Research Projects Agency, 238,                   67-68,70,194,199-201,217,
      239,249,250,251,252,267                             219-20, 224, 225-26, 230, 232, 233,
aerial reconnaissance:                                    234,237,239-40,245,317,325,
  altitude challenges of, 32, 45, 79-80,                  331, 332, 343-44, 347-48, 350-51;
     130-31,132-37,164,280,381                            see also Samos satellite; WS-1 17L
  by camera-equipped helium balloons,                     satellite program
     25,179-80,246,261                                 Scientific Advisory Board of, 52, 53,
  camouflage techniques of, 39, 339                       70,88,95,227
  CIA control vs. military oversight on,               Soviet strength estimated by, 26, 275,
     xiii, xx, 34                                           283,296,298-99,301,305
  fuel chemistry and, 45, 339                           studies on intelligence needs of, 53-56,
  lens design in, 38, 42, 44-45                             67-68
  Soviet interception of, 47, 51, 66, 104,              U-2 control by CIA vs., xiii, 100, 101,
     140, 169                                               102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107-8, 124,
   strategic vs. tactical, 38^-0                            126, 147-48, 159, 183
   by supersonic aircraft, xvii, xviii, 227,            U-2 pilots drawn from, 59-60
      231,279-81,298,301,329,330,                       see also Strategic Air Command
       333,338-43                                    Allen, George V, 213
   see also U-2 spy plane                            AlQaeda,361,364,365,368
Aerobee rocket, 234
                                                     Alsop, Joseph, 116, 119, 274-75
aeromedical research, 161, 162                       Alsop, Stewart, 120, 274-75
Afghanistan:                                         Alvarez, Luis, 344
   Soviet invasion of, xv                            America First Committee, 117
   U.S. war in, 337, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368         Anderson, Rudolph, 328
Agena rocket, 234, 242, 243, 246, 247,               Araki, Sam, 255
       250, 251, 253, 258, 259-60, 262-63,           Arbenz, Jacobo, 120
       265,271,295,302,319,321                       Archangel (A-l) aircraft, 280
Air Force, U.S.:                                     Area 51, 138-39
   budget issues of, 251, 275, 276, 296              arms control agreements, 141, 203-4,
   capsule recovery made by, 238, 249,                    228-29,326,389
       320, 397                                      Army, U.S.:
  in Corona program, 237,238,2 49-5 1 ,                Camp Cooke base of, 263-64
     252-53, 255, 264-65, 266, 320,                    rocket/missile programs of, 195-96,
     346-47                                               206-8,210,219,223,236
  Intelligence Systems Panel of, 78, 85,               satellite plans of, 216-17, 223, 236
     95                                              Army Air Forces, U.S., 38, 39, 40, 52

                                               427
                                      428     Index



Arnold, Henry H. "Hap," 42                      CIA career of, xvii, 33, 113-14,
   military career of, xvii, 40, 49, 52            119-22,253,302,328,329,332
   science-business network built by, xvii,     death of, 329
      41,52,53,57,58,84                         on espionage technologies vs.
astronauts, 134, 160-61, 162                      informants, 362
Atlas missile, 197-98, 199, 200, 206, 254,      management style of, xiv, 113, 114-15,
      276,279,335                                  122-24,125,126,198,243-44,
Atomic Energy Commission, 19, 86, 88,             250-51,252-54,290,301
      138                                       regime-destabilization plots and, xiv,
Atta, Mohammad, xiv                                113,120-21,302-3,328,329,338,
Auchincloss, Louis, 116                            385
Austin, Harold R. "Hal," xvii, 3-10, 11,        satellite program directed by, xvii, 211,
     24,29,30,31,32,33,46,68,135,                  230, 234, 237, 238, 243-44, 246-55,
      326                                          257,269,271,272,288,289,290,
                                                   295, 296, 301-2, 315, 318, 321, 322,
Baker, James G., 38, 39, 43-44, 45, 96,            323
      106, 146, 164                             on spy-plane development, xvii, xx, 83,
   Air95Force advisory panel of, 78, 85,            100,108-9,121-27,128,137,138,
                                                    139,145,146,147,148,156,
   on U.S. reconnaissance goals, 54, 55             158-59,167,168,228,281,339
   on U-2 camera system, xvii, 99, 107,         staff
                                                   298of, xx, 123, 250, 252-53, 291,
      121,149-53,157,166,188,314
Baker, William O., 349                          U-2 operations and, 167-68, 177, 178,
Baldwin, Edward, 128, 131                          181-87,188,189,231,238,281,
Baldwin, Hanson, 180,297,313,318                  284, 290-91, 292, 294, 298-99, 300,
balloons, aerial reconnaissance by, 25,           301,303^,308,309,329,338,
      179-80,246,261                              395
Barnes, Tracy, 118                            Blackbird (SR-71), see Lockheed A-12
Batlin, Alex, 178                                  Oxcart
Battle, Clarence L. "Lee," 252                Boeing Aircraft, 21, 170, 367
Battle of the Bulge, 25                       Boeing B-52 bomber, 21, 31, 170-71, 188
Bay of Pigs invasion, xiv, 113, 303, 328,     Boeing RB-47E bomber, 4, 5-6, 25
      329,332,338                             Bohlen, Charles, 184-85
Beacon Hill Study Group, 54, 67, 68, 72,      Boston University Optical Research
      77,78,88,95,228                              Laboratory, 38, 39, 45, 65, 229
Beckler, David Z, 209                         Boyce, Christopher John, 354
Beerli, Stanley, 123, 124, 291, 292           Boyle, WilliamS, 348-49
Bell, Larry, 41                               Bridges, Styles, 214
Bell Aircraft Corporation, 78, 81, 82, 83,    Bronk,DedevW,29
      85                                      Brugioni, Dino A, 155, 322
BellX-16,83,85                                Buckley, Oliver E, 29, 30
Berlin, Soviet control in, 282, 291           Bulganin, Nikolai A., 141
Beschloss, Michael, 183, 307                  Bundy, McGeorge, 116
bin Laden, Osama, xiv, 354                    Bundy, William, 116
Bison bomber (Myacheslav-4), 21, 29,          Burke, William, 298
     30-31,82,99,170,171,173,183,             Bush, George H.W, 369
     187                                      Bush, George W, 361, 365
Bissell, Richard M., Jr., 113-27, 229         Bush, Vannevar, 95, 197
   background of, 100, 113, 114, 115-19,      Buzard, Frank, 266, 271, 286
      122,124-25,274,275                      Byrnes, James, 17
                                      Index            429


Cabell, Charles Pearre, 100, 106, 107,               on Soviet space program, 208
      124,182,249,295                                supersonic plane developed by, 338-43
California Institute of Technology, 11,              2001 terrorist attacks and, xiv, 360-61,
      13,41                                            400
camera technology:                                   U-2 program and, 99-105, 106-9,
   polarizing filters in, 93, 94                        121-27, 147-48, 159-60, 163, 183,
   on rockets, 55                                       230-31, 292, 304, 306, 308, 313, 329
  on satellites, 32, 63, 65-66, 68, 69, 194,       Chappellet, Cyril, 75
     199, 219, 226-27, 232, 234, 316-17,           charge-coupled devices (CCDs), 348-50
     347-50; see also specific satellite systems   Charyk, Joseph V, 332
  telephoto lenses in, 42                          China, People's Republic of, 19, 20
  temperature extremes and, 32, 65, 256               aerial reconnaissance on, 47, 305
   on U-2 spy planes, xvii, 99, 101-2, 107,        Churchill, Winston, 17, 46, 1 18
      121,149-53,166,167,177,187,                  CIA, see Central Intelligence Agency
      188,248,257,258,303,304,307,                 Clark, David, 136
      314,322,323,327                              Clark, Mark, 174
   in World War II, 40, 43, 44-45                  Clarke, Arthur C, 63
Canberra bomber, proposed modification             Cleator, P. E., 59
      of, 49-50, 51, 55, 78, 146                   Clemens, Samuel (Mark Twain), 1 1 5
Cannon, Clarence, 166                              Clinton, Bill, 337, 356, 357, 358, 359,
Carter, Jimmy, xv, 337, 351                              360,367,401
Carter, John H., 78-79, 241-42, 298                CL-282, see U-2 (CL-282) spy plane
Carter, Marshall, 346                              cold war:
Case, Harold, 229                                     aerial reconnaissance campaign of,
Castro, Fidel, 113,179,302-3                             46-47
CCDs (charge-coupled devices), 348-50                onset of, 15-18,20
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),                 communications satellites, 62, 63, 203
     117-18                                        Compton, Karl T., 87
  aerial espionage managed by, xiii-xiv            Conant, James, 38-39
  congressional oversight of, 166, 167             Congress, U.S.:
  counter-terrorism capabilities of,                  CIA oversight of, 166-67
     354-55,356,362,400                              see also Senate, U.S.
  Development Projects Division of, 298            containment policy, 1 7
  government destabilization plots of,             Convair, 196,279,280
     113,120-21,302-3,328,329                      Conway, Harry, 261-62
  high-tech systems vs. human skills of,           Cooke, Philip St. George, 263-64
     354-55,358-62                                 Corona reconnaissance satellite, 245-70
  Pentagon conflicts with, xiii, xx, 34,             attitude-control system of, 246, 249
     251-52,329-30,331-33                            budget of, 247, 250, 251-52, 257, 295
  photo-interpretation operation of, 153,            camera systems of, xvii, 237, 243,
     155-58,187,326,331,363                             246-47, 248, 255-58, 260, 266, 279,
  satellite programs under, xvii, xx, 2 1 1 ,           288,294,295,301,302,316,
     229-30,234,237,238,239,247,                        318-19,321,325-26,344
     250,253-54,257,331,332,333,                     capsule recovery and, 238, 243, 246,
     344-47,348,349,350-53                              247, 258-62, 279, 286-87, 3 17, 3 19,
  science-technology directorate of, 329,               320-21,325,397
     330,331,337-38,369                              as CIA project, xvii, xx, 211, 229-30,
  on Soviet military strength, 26, 170,                 234,237,238,239,247,250,
     174,213,273,275,278,281,283,                       253-54,257,345^7
     296, 299                                        code name of, 2 3 8
                                   430         Index

Corona reconnaissance satellite (cont.)           satellite development urged by, xvii, 57,
  designing of, 241-44, 246, 254-63, 279             67-68,211,227,232,240
  development schedule of, 243, 247,           De Gaulle, Charles, 3 16
     249,257,269,271,315                       digital imaging, 349
  duration of use of, 249, 326                 Dirks, Leslie, 348,350,365
  early difficulties of, 271, 283, 285-90,     Discoverer program, 239, 266-67, 268,
     294-96,301-2,317-18                            271,285-86,288,294,296,301,
  intelligence produced by, 283, 326-27              302,317,318,319-22
  launches of, 230, 237, 238, 247, 249,        Divine, Robert A., 223-24
     252, 263-65, 266-67, 269, 271, 283,       Donovan, Allen, 54, 78, 84-85, 105-6
     285-86,288,294-96,301-2,                  Doolittle, James, 70, 86, 130, 297, 299,
     317-21,326                                      305
  Lockheed involvement in, xix, 237,           Douglas, Donald, 41
     241-42, 243^4, 245, 247, 250, 252,        Douglas Aircraft Company, 32, 58,
     255,263,266,319                                 60-61,62,79,196,242-43
  project management and, 237, 238,            Doyle, David, 322
     243-44, 247-54, 290, 390, 398             Draper, Charles Stark, 335
  quality of photography from, 237-38,         Drell, Sidney, 96-97, 334, 344, 349, 351
     246, 248, 249, 322-23, 324, 325,          Dryden, Hugh, 168
     327,343,344                               Dubcek, Alexander, 328
  rockets used in, 237, 242-43, 250-51,        DuBridge, Lee, 13, 24, 29, 82, 85, 86, 171
     253,271,279,285,286,295,296,              Duckett, Carl, 335, 350, 351
     301,302,319,321                           Dulles, Allen W., xiii-xiv, xvii, 203, 335
  secrecy of, 230, 237, 238-40, 241,              background of, 100, 138
     245^6, 248, 249, 251, 253, 265-69,           Bissell's work with, 33, 120, 253, 302
     287,316,318                                  covert destabilization efforts and, 302,
  Soviet recovery of capsule from, 285,              328,332
     287                                          on satellite development, 205, 232,
   turnaround time required by, 327—                 233,237,247,250,252,271,295
      328                                         on Soviet military capability, 2 1 3-14,
Crabbe, Lionel, 181                                  275,277,296
Critchfield, James, 303                           U-2 oversight and, 102, 104, 105,
Crossroads, Operation, 36                            107-8,109,121,122,124,147,
Crystal (Kennan) (KH-1 1) satellite,                 156-57, 166, 176, 177, 178, 180,
     347-52,358,360,365-66                           181, 182, 185-89, 281, 290-91, 297,
Cuba:                                                299,305,311,315,338
   Bay of Pigs invasion of, xiv, 113, 302-3,   Dulles, Eleanor, 120
      328,329,332,338                          Dulles, John Foster, xvii, 100, 107, 120,
   in missile crisis, 153, 155, 327-28               181,203,211,291
Cullen,PaulT,48                                   on diplomatic risks of spy flights, 104,
Cunningham, James, 123                               281,311
Curtiss, Glenn, 41                                on satellite development, 214, 235
Cutler, Robert, 220
Czechoslovakia, 17-18, 328                     Eastman Kodak, 101-2, 157, 199
                                                 reconnaissance lenses produced by, 42,
David Clark Company, 135-36, 165, 307               43,66
Davies, Merton B., 58-61, 64, 70, 83, 228        satellite film from, 246, 257-58, 295,
   in photoreconnaissance satellite
                                                    302,318-19
     design, 65, 68, 69, 194, 226-27, 232,     Eden, Anthony, 181
     234,239,242,347                           Edwards Air Force Base, 137
                                    Index          431


Eisenhower, Dwight D., 20, 56, 100, 384          on U-2 affair, 303-5, 306, 307-14
  on airspace violations, 5,10, 46,              U-2 deployment decisions of, 169-70,
     176-77,188-89,283,372                          176-83, 185-87, 188-89, 201, 226,
  budget policies of, 27-28, 278                   230, 231, 270-71, 281-85, 290-92,
  CIA destabilization plots approved by,           293, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 303-5,
     121,302                                       312,313,315,318,343,372
  congressional critics of, 2 1 3, 2 18-19,      on U-2 flights as non-military
      222,278                                      operation, 107, 108, 147-48, 158,
  on dangers of defense development, xii,
                                                     159,312-13
      14,27-28,278-79                          Eisenhower, John, 270
  death of, 324                                Eisenhower, Mamie, 107, 169
  ill health of, 169-70, 181, 235, 323         elections:
  innovative defense technologies                 of 1956, 169
    supported by, xii-xiii, xviii, 33, 58,        of 1958, 274
    84, 86, 88-89, 102-3, 104, 106, 107,          of 1960, 272, 274
    108, 169-70, 173, 175, 227, 231-32,        Elliott, William Y, 209
    280,281,289-90,295,324,329,                Ericson, Bob, 131, 299-300, 301, 305,
    339,361                                          306
  intelligence sought by, xvi, 24, 25-26,      Estar film, 102,258,302
     71,103,169,284,312,327,354                Explorer, 236,237
  on interservice rivalries, 217, 21 9, 250,   explosive decompression, 134, 136
     251
  military background of, xiii, 25, 88,        Fairchild Camera and Instrument
     89-90,172,279,290                               Corporation, 226, 246, 247, 248
  public statements vs. defense policy of,     Fairchild Engine and Airplane
     171-73,174,214-15,217-18,                       Corporation, 78, 81
     308-10,312,316                            FIA (Future Imagery Architecture),
  on reconnaissance photographs, 167,                365-67
     177,188,324                               Finney, John W., 210, 268, 269, 285-86,
  satellite development and, 67, 193,                320-21
     203,204,205,211,212,215,                  Fisk, James B., 86, 101, 105, 106
     216-17,218,223,224,225,236,               Fitzgerald, Desmond, 118
     237-38, 240, 247, 248, 249, 250,          Flemming, Arthur, 29, 176
     252, 271, 283, 289-90, 294, 295,          Flickinger, Donald D., 135, 136, 381
     316,317-18,322-24,331,397                 flight suits, pressurized, 45, 80, 133, 134,
  science-adviser post created by, 220,              135-37,165,307
     222,223,231,331                           Ford, Vincent, 1 3
  science-industry-government                  Frankel, Max, 210-11
    partnership developed under, xi, xiii,     Future Imagery Architecture (FIA),
    84,88-89,90,220-22,349                          365-67
  on Soviet military capability, 172,
    272-73,274,275,277,283                     Gaddis, John Lewis, 16
  on Soviet-U.S. relations, 15, 140-42,        Gaither, H. Rowan, Jr., 274
     146,203-4,206,270-71,282,                 Gambit, 344, 347, 351
    284-85, 291-92, 293, 297, 312,             Gardner, Trevor, 151, 201, 384
     313-14                                       advanced reconnaissance urged by,
  Sputnik launching and, 211,212,                   xviii, 10-11,12, 13,24,28,73,
    214-15, 216-19, 220-21, 223-24                  82
  on surprise-attack vulnerability, 27, 29,      missile technology reviewed by, 22,
     30,31,82,85,171,312                            174,175,197,334
                                   432       Index

Gardner, Trevor (cont.)                      Harriman, Averell, 1 18, 1 19
  on U.S. vulnerability, xviii, 11, 12,31,   Harvard Observatory, 44
     85, 170, 174                            Hawkins, Willis M., 319
   on U-2 program, 102, 105, 106, 108        Heavilin, Vance, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9
Garwin, Richard, 92, 96, 351                 Helms, Richard, 24, 323-24
Gates, Robert, 369                           Herseyjohn, 14
Gates, Thomas S., 296, 311,317               Herter, Christian, 291, 309, 3 1 1-12, 3 1 3,
Gath, Elmer, 128                                   316
Geary, Leo, 123                              Hexagon (KH-9) satellite, 344, 347, 366
Gell-Mann, Murray, 334                       Hibbard, Hall L., 75, 76
General Electric, 81, 225                    Hill,JimmieD.,34,369
   Corona return capsule built by, 246,      Hiller, Stan, 242
     247,258-60                              Hiroshima, bombing of, 14, 35
Gilpatric, Roswell L., 345                   Hitchcock, Alfred, 33, 96
Glenn, John, 134, 160,258                    HoChiMinh,30
Glenn L. Martin Company, 201, 207, 208       Hoffman, Paul, 119
Global Hawk, 368                             Holt, Carl, 6, 8, 9
Global Positioning System, 335               Hoover, Herbert, 1 74
Goddard, George W., xviii, 40, 41-42,        Horner, Richard E., 233
     43-45, 327                              Houston, Lawrence R., 24, 126
Goddard, Robert H., 23, 41-45, 60, 195       Hughes Aircraft, 352
Goering, Hermann, 178                        Hull,JohnE.,297
Goodpaster, Andrew J., xviii                 Hycon Manufacturing Company, 1 1 ,
  on downing of Powers flight, 307, 309            151,153,384
  on Eisenhower's management style,
     102-3,289-90                            Ice Station Zebra (MacLean), 287
  on satellite program, 217, 230, 234,       IGY (International Geophysical Year),
     236, 237-38, 249, 251, 289-90, 318,          202,205,209-10,236
     322                                     Ikonos satellite, 367
  on science education, 222                  Imagery Requirements Subcommittee,
  on U-2 deployment, 181-83, 185-87,               360
     284,285,291-92,297,303,304              India, nuclear weapons tests in, 356-58,
  on U-2 photo resolution, 167                    359-60
Grand Slam, Operation, 305                   Intelligence Systems Panel, 78, 88, 95
                                             intercontinental ballistic missiles
gravity suits (G-suits), 136
Gray, Gordon, 317, 318, 397                       (ICBMs),33,199
Gray, Paul E., 87                              satellite development vs., 62, 70, 88,
Greenstein, Fred I., 103
                                                   197,203,215-16
Gross, Courtlandt, 74                           Soviet vs. U.S. progress on, 22, 23,
Gross, Robert, 74                                  174-76, 210-1 1, 215, 273-75,
Grosse, Aristid V, 67                              276-77, 281, 296, 323; see also
                                                   "missile gap"
Guatemala, CIA-backed coup in, 120,
     121,302                                   see also missile technology
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory,          International Geophysical Year (IGY),
     41,57                                        202,205,209-10,236
GulfWar,337,359,364                          Iran, 121
                                                U-2 landing site in, 291, 292-93
Hagen,JohnP.,235                             Israel, 1967 Arab war with, 328
Hagerty, James, 205-6, 214, 215, 236         Itek Corporation, 229, 246-47, 248, 255,
Hall,R.Cargill,50,239,390                         257,258,262,294,322-23,344
                                     Index            433


Jackson, Henry, 170, 175,213,296                  Khrushchev, Nikita S., xviii, 180, 182,
Jackson, William H., 209                               188,284,312
Jeremiah, David E., 359, 360, 362                   East German control sought by, 282,
jet engines:                                           291,293
   high-altitude operation of, 79, 80, 130,         Open Skies proposal rejected by,
      164                                              141^*2,228
   single vs. twin, 81                              on Soviet missiles, 176, 276, 293
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 41, 57                    on spy satellites, 316
                                                     U.S. visited by, 291, 293, 297
Johnson, Clarence L. "Kelly":
   as aircraft designer, xviii, 32, 72, 73, 75,      on U-2 overflights, 184—85, 300, 306,
      76-77, 79-85, 99, 101, 106-7, 121,                308,309,310,313,314
      126,132,143,144-45,153,164,                 Khrushchev, Sergei, 142, 185
      188,189,226,244                             Kiefer, Eugene P., 53, 54, 79, 82, 83,
                                                        123
   A- 12 supersonic plane designed by,
      xviii, 279-80, 330, 333, 338-42, 343        Kilgore, Donald, 162,163
   background of, 73-75                           Killian, James R., Jr., 82, 199, 228
   management tactics of, 75-76, 77, 243,           background of, 87-88, 89, 146
      290, 339-40                                   on CIA science research, 338
   on U-2 project, xviii, 77, 82, 83, 106,          on defense preparedness, 29, 30, 3 1,
      109,121,123,125,126,127-35,                     82,85,86,106,171,176,274,
      137^10, 142-45, 146, 148, 150, 151,             278
      153,157,164,166,173,188,189,                  on Land, 92-93
      226,298,299-300,307,314                       as MIT president, xiii, xviii, 87, 89,
                                                       100
Johnson, Lyndon B., 174, 218-19, 222,
      236,268,272                                   presidential appointment of, 220,
   as president, 116, 327, 347                         223-24,227,231,235,300
   on Soviet threat, xviii, 274, 278, 296           on satellites, 202, 204, 211, 212-13,
Joiner, Ernie L., 143-44                               215,220,225,227,230,233,234,
Jupiter rocket, 208, 215, 223, 236, 253,              235, 237, 238, 246, 247, 248-49,
      288                                             250,251,252,322
                                                    on science advisers, 90-91, 92-93,
Kammerer, Dorsey, 137                                  95-96
Kampiles, William, 351                              on science education, 221
Katz, Amrom H., 44, 45, 146                         on Soviet space program, 212-13,214,
  on satellite program, 65-66, 226, 227,              215,218
     231,232,234,239-40,242                          spy-plane development backed by, 73,
Kennan, George E, 17                                    84,102-3,105,121,146^7,168,
Kennan (Crystal) (KH-1 1) satellite,                    187-88,279,290,330
     347-52, 358, 360, 365-66                        on U-2 deployment, 181, 182, 184,
Kennedy, John E, xiii, xviii, 113,116,                  308,329
     272,323,325,349                              King, Betty, 126
  on CIA management, 328, 329, 333,               King, Bob, 125, 126
     338,345                                      Kissinger, Henry, 351
  in Cuban missile crisis, 155, 327-28            Kistiakowsky, George, 300, 3 17-18, 33 1,
Kennedy, Joseph W, 96                                   334,397
Kent, Sherman, 118                                Klein, Burton, 83
KH-9 (Hexagon) satellite, 344, 347, 366           Knowland, William, 108
KH-1 1 (Crystal) (Kennan) satellite,              Knutson, Martin, xviii, 159-61, 162-64,
     347-52, 358, 360, 365-66                          166,292-93
Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 121                 Kollmann Instrument Company, 129
                                     434       Index

Korean War, 19-20, 3 1, 48, 50, 64, 66           high-altitude spy planes promoted by,
Korolyov, Sergei, 22, 23                            xix, 38, 39, 42, 45^6, 48-50, 51, 55,
Kosovo, war in, 337, 368                            56,57,71,72,78,146-47,187,314
Kucera, George, 238                              in military, 35, 38, 43, 48, 56, 82, 239
                                                 on satellites, 56, 57, 65, 68, 228-29,
Lacrosse radar satellites, 360                      230,240
Laika,222,223                                    strategic reconnaissance conceived by,
Laird, Melvin, 351                                  37-40,45,47-48,146,211,356
Land, Edwin H., 228                            LeMay, Curtis E., 13, 45
  background of, 33, 93-94, 96, 125              military career of, xix, 196
  CIA oversight authority backed by,             on satellite development, 61, 62, 70,
    99-101, 102, 104-5, 121                         196, 197
  on CIA science programs, 338                   U-2147program resisted by, xix, 50, 83,
  on Corona camera systems, 237-38,
     246-47,248,279,294,322                    LeVier, Tony, xix, 137, 138, 142-45, 147,
  on government advisory committees,                 162,163,164
     78,90,91-93,95-99,220,231,                Leviero, Anthony, 206
     331-32,351                                Levison, Walter, 45, 246, 294
  on high-altitude camera system, 99,          Lilienthal, David, 19
     101,107,149,157                           Lindsey, Robert, 3 54
  on intelligence needs, 54, 86, 95-96,        Lipp, James E., 62, 63, 64-65, 66, 68, 69,
     97-99,189,200,329                              194,197,201
  inventions of, xix, 91, 93, 94, 125          Lippmann, Walter, 311
  on spy satellites, xiii, 1 89, 202-3 ,211,   Lobdell, Harold, 87
     220,225,227,230,233,234,                  Lockheed:
     237-38,246-47,248^9,250                     fighter aircraft designed at, 72, 76,
  on supersonic spy-plane proposal,                 143
     280-81,290,330                              private-commercial aircraft produced
  on threat assessment, 28, 30, 278                 at, 74-75, 135
   onU-2 deployment, 168, 181, 182,              rocket booster built by, 234, 242
      183,308                                    in satellite programs, xix, 32, 77, 194,
   U-2 development supported by, xiii,              201,233,237,241-44,245,247,
      xix, 73, 84, 85, 99-103, 105-6, 107,          250,252,255,263,266,319
      121, 124-25, 146-47, 168, 169, 188,        Skunk Works at, 72, 73, 76, 128, 129,
      314,329,338                                   243
Laos, CIA operations in, 302, 329                supersonic planes designed at, 280,
Lassetter, Edgar T., 162                            339^0,341
Latham, Allan, Jr., 96                           in U-2 development, xx, 32, 76-85,
Lauderdale, Lloyd K., 353                           106-7, 108, 109, 122, 124, 126-27,
Lay, James, 232                                     128-29,137,139,143-45,147
Lee, Andrew Daulton, 354                       Lockheed A-12 Oxcart (SR-71
Leghorn, Richard S., 97                             Blackbird), xvii, xviii, 72, 227, 231,
   Air Force bureaucracy and, 49-50,                279-81,298,301,329,330,333,
      53-54                                         338^43
   Air Force intelligence needs projected      Lockheed Electra, 74-75, 76, 135
    by, 53-54, 55-56, 300                      Lockheed P-38 Lightning, 72, 76
  atomic test seen by, 35-37, 39, 45           Lockheed XF- 1 04 Starnghter, 143, 147
  background of, 43, 146                       Lodge, Henry Cabot, 205
  Corona camera system supplied by,
                                               Logan, Tom, 323-24
                                               Long Telegram, 17                             ,
     246,256,257,322-23,344
                                   Index          435


Lovelace, William Randolph (uncle),           Mees, Kenneth, 43,44
     161-62                                   Midas satellite system, 317, 318
Lovelace, William Randolph, II                Middle East, 1967 war in, 328
     (nephew), 135, 161, 162, 163, 381        MiG fighter aircraft, 4-5, 372
Lovelace Clinic, 160-63                       military-industrial complex, 278-79
Lumumba, Patrice, 179, 385                    "missile gap," 170, 270, 272, 273, 274-75,
Luna spacecraft, 293-94                              278,293,296,297,323
Lundahl, Arthur C, 124, 328                      see also intercontinental ballistic
                                                     missiles
  background of, 153-55
  CIA photo-intelligence center               missile launches, satellite warnings of,
    organized by, xix, 155-56, 157-58,              239,317
     166,326,331,363                          missile technology:
  Corona photos produced by, 322,                air-to-surface, 368
    323-24,325-26                               guidance systems of, 172, 334-35, 337,
  U-2 photo-interpretation work of, 1 56,         364
     181,187,315,322
                                                payload weight in, 1 97-98
                                                satellite development linked with, 62,
MacArthur, Douglas, 19                             70,88,197,203,209,215-16
McCarthy, Joseph R., 30, 86, 120                solid-fuel advantages in, 276-77
McClellanJohnL., 30                             Soviet, 22, 23-24, 82, 170, 172, 174,
McConeJohn A., 328, 332-33, 338, 343,              175-76, 189, 200, 210-11, 213-14,
    345, 346, 347                                  215,230,239,270,272-78,281,
McCormack, James, 19, 198                          282, 283-84, 290-91, 292, 293, 296,
MacDonald, Duncan E., 39, 45, 229                  298-99,306,323,326,335-37,
McDougall, Walter A., 207-8                        352-53
McElheny, Victor K, 97, 294                     surface-to-air, 298-99, 301, 306
McElroy, Neil H., 217, 222, 223, 233,            telemetry data on, 335-37, 352-53
     237,277-78                                  U.S. funding of, 196-97
  on spy planes, 232, 281, 282, 283,          MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
     284                                            Technology), 334
MacLean, Alistair, 287                        Mitchell, Harold E., 321
McMahon, John, 97, 123, 124, 289, 332         Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, Shah of Iran,
McMillan, Brockway, 344-47                          121,291
McNamara, Robert, 323                         moon, spacecraft to, 222, 293-94
Manhattan Project, 1 1, 14, 33, 41, 67, 86,   Moore, Gordon, 334
     175,219                                  Mossadegh, Mohammed, 121
Marshall, George C, 118                       Mural, 325
Marshall Islands, atomic tests in, 35-37,     Murphree,E.V.,210
     45                                       Murrow, Edward R., 194
Marshall Plan, 17-18, 113, 118-19, 120,       Myacheslav-4 (Bison) bomber, 21, 29,
     122                                           30-31,82,99,170,171,173,183,
Martin Aircraft Company, 77-78, 81, 82,            187
     83,85
Martin B-57 bomber, 77-78, 81, 82, 83,        National Advisory Committee on
     85, 105                                       Aeronautics (NACA), 168, 184
Massachusetts Institute of Technology         National Aeronautics and Space
     (MIT), 334                                    Administration (NASA), 162, 168,
Mathison, Charles "Moose," 287, 397                258,267,308,309,316,320
Matye, Bob, 144                               National Defense Education Act (1958),
                                                   224
Mayday (Beschloss), 307
                                    436        Index

National Imagery and Mapping Agency              Soviet development of, xviii, 14, 15,
                                                    18-19,20,21
     (NIMA), 363-64, 365, 367, 368
National Intelligence Estimates (NIEs),          surprise attack with, xviii, 12-13, 26-27
     26
National Photographic Interpretation           Oberth, Hermann, 59-60
      Center, 331, 363                         Oder, Frederic C. E. "Fritz," 227, 228,
National Reconnaissance Office (NRO),               229,230,234,239,266
      xv, xix, 244, 331-32, 344-47, 349,       Office of Defense Mobilization, 29, 176,
      350,365,369                                   220,224,227
National Science Foundation, 95,               Old, Bruce S., 95
      202                                      Open Skies proposal, 140^2, 146, 203,
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty                         228
      Organization), 18, 20, 175               Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 14, 86
Naval Photographic Interpretation              Overstreet, Carl, 181,182
      Center, 154, 155
Navy, U.S., 63, 79, 140,320                    Pakistan:
   rocket/missile programs of, 193,              Indian nuclear rivalry with, 356-57,
      206-7, 208, 209                               360
   satellite programs of, 196, 332; see also     U-2 departures from, 291, 292, 299,
      Vanguard program                              305
Nazis, rocket technology of, 32, 60, 194,      Parangosky, John, 123, 291
       195-96, 207                             Park Chung-hee, xv
Nesmeyanov, Aleksandr, 210                     Patterson, Robert, 40
Newton, Dick, 142                              Peacetime Airborne Reconnaissance
NIEs (National Intelligence Estimates),
      26                                            Program, 46-47
                                               Penkovsky, Oleg, 336
NIMA    (National Imagery and Mapping          Pentagon, 2001 assault on, xiv, 362
     Agency), 363-64, 365, 367, 368            Perkin, RichardS., 100, 151
Nixon, Richard M., 203, 272, 311, 323,         Perry,William,331,337,353
     350-51                                    photogrammetry, 154
North Atlantic Treaty Organization             photo interpretation, 153-58, 362-65
     (NATO), 18,20, 175                        Plummer, James W., 77, 244-45
Northrup Grumman, 368                             on Bissell, 243-44, 290
Noyce, Robert, 334                                Corona engineering led by, xix,
NRO (National Reconnaissance Office),                241^2, 243-44, 247, 252, 255, 259,
     xv, xix, 244, 331-32, 344-37, 349,             262-63,265,271,288,290,295,
     350,365,369                                     296,301-2,318,319,320
nuclear weapons:                                  on covert procedures, 245-46, 265
  arms control agreements on, 228-29,          Polaroid Corporation, xix, 91, 94, 95, 96
     326                                       Powers, Francis Gary, xix, 166, 189, 303,
  delivery systems of, 14, 21-22, 170,               304^7,308,309,314,321
     197-98,273,274,294                        Pratt & Whitney, 100, 107, 123, 130,
  destructive potential of, 21-22, 27,               166,300,305,342
     35-37                                     Predator, 368
  deterrence policy and, 172                   Preliminary Design of an Experimental
  fusion technology in, 2 1-22, 373                  World-Circling Spaceship, 61-62, 196
  Japan bombed with, 14, 89                    President's Board of Consultants on
  popular fears of, 3 1                             Foreign Intelligence Activities,
  satellite information on tests of,                231-32,297
     356-60                                    Preston, Joe, 3
                                  Index        437


Project Aquatone, 109, 122, 180               in satellite programs, 206-9, 222,
Project Feed Back, 69-70, 193, 199, 201,         234-36, 237, 242^13, 250-51, 253,
     347                                         271,279,285,286,295,296,301,
Project Genetrix, 179-80                         302,319,321
Project Mercury, 258, 160, 162                solid-fuel models of, 207, 276-77
Purcell, Edward, 54, 96, 97, 106, 189,        Soviet, 22-23, 218, 222, 270, 276,
      278,279                                    293-94
Putt, Donald L., 82, 105, 106, 108            V-2,22,23,60,89, 194, 196,207
                                           Rockets Through Space (Cleator), 59
Quarles, Donald A., xix, 29, 197           Roosevelt, Franklin D., 95, 116, 117, 173,
                                                 197
  satellite development and, 67, 204,
     205,209,215-17,218,233,237,           Ruseckas, Joseph A., 136-37, 165, 307
     251,252,283                           Russell, Richard B, 166, 174, 222-23
   on Soviet military strength, 171,
     215-16,219                            SAC, see Strategic Air Command
   U-2 missions urged by, 281, 282, 283    Sakharov, Andrei, 21,22
                                           Salisbury, Harrison, 170
Rabb, Maxwell, 2 14, 2 17                  Salter, Robert, 62, 194, 201, 241
Rabi, I. L,29,89, 221, 222                 Saltonstall, Leverett, 166
Raborn, William E, 347                     Samos satellite, 239, 317, 318, 331, 343,
Ramo, Simon, 198,334,335                         347^8, 397
RAND Corporation, xvii, 12, 32, 57-58      SAMs (surface-to-air missiles), 298-99,
   and satellite development, 57, 61-65,         301,306
      67,68,70-71,193,194,196,197,         satellites:
      199, 200, 220, 225, 226, 227, 228,      animals carried on, 222, 223, 288,
      231,232,234,240,317,347                   320
Rao, Narasimha, 358                          as civilian research project, 201-10
Raymond, Jack, 309                           domestic uses of, 62, 63, 203
Raymond, Richard C, 225                      freedom-of-space principle on,
Raytheon Systems Company, 367                   193-94,202,215,216
Reagan, Ronald, 276, 327                     in geosynchronous orbit, 63, 352,
Reber, James Q., 183                            353
reconnaissance, strategic vs. tactical,      Global Positioning System, 335
      37-38                                  launches of, 234—36
Redstone rocket, 207, 208, 209, 215,         missile development linked with, 62,
      216-17                                    70,88,197,203,209,215-16
Reston, James, 3 10-1 1                      political impact of, 61-62, 63, 204,
Rhyolite, 353-54                                208-9,211-23
Rich, Ben, 76-77, 128-29, 280, 340, 342      popular interest in, 66-67, 223,
Ridenour, Louis N., 62                          285-86,288
Ritland, Osmond J., xx, 123, 138, 228,        private companies in development of,
     230, 234, 238, 247, 250-54, 290,            367,401
     295,321                                  rocket propulsion of, 206-9, 222,
Roberts, Chalmers, 274                           234-36
Robertson, Reuben B., 210                     UN registration of paths of, 358
Rockefeller, Laurence, 229                   see also spy satellites; specific satellite
Rockefeller, Nelson, 204, 205                    reconnaissance systems
rockets:                                   Schalk, Lou, 341
  cold-gas propulsion system in, 3 19      Schirra,Wally, 134
  liquid propellants of, 59, 60, 195       Schoessler, Don H., 257, 258
                                    438       Index

Schriever, Bernard A.:                          Open Skies proposal rejected by,
   advanced reconnaissance systems                140-42,228
      urged by, 32, 51, 54, 55, 56, 82, 83,     radar network of, 177, 186-87, 227,
      84,336                                       231,306
   military career of, xx, 51-53, 70, 198,      rocket technology of, 22-23, 218, 222,
      238,239                                      270,276,293-94
   missile development overseen by, 88,         satellite information on, xv, 3 16,
      174,198-99,277,335                           321-24,326-27,351,389
   on satellites, 57, 64, 70, 199, 200-201,     scientific-technological expertise of,
      211,227,228,229-30,233,234,                  212-15,221
      254,267-68                                in space race, 71, 194, 201-4, 206, 208,
Schwarzkopf, Norman, 364                           209,210,211,237,243
Scoville, Herbert J. "Pete," Jr., 332, 333,     Sputnik program of, 211-24, 231,236,
      338                                          272,273,274,276,320,335
Seaberg, John, 78, 81-82, 105, 106              spy overflights attacked by, xix, 47, 5 1,
Senate, U.S., 296, 318                             66,104,140,166,168,298-301,
   espionage oversight of, 1 66                    303-15
   military preparedness hearings of, 274,      surprise attack potential of, 12-13,
      278,284                                      26-27,82,85,173,176,272,312
Sentry project, 239, 268, 317                   U.S. need of intelligence on, 25-29,
Shapley, Harlow, 44                                50-51, 82, 169, 170, 189, 230, 284,
Shepard, Alan, 134,258                             312,343
Simon, Leslie, 207                              U.S. spy satellite secrets passed to, 351,
Smith, George E., 348-49                          353-54
Society Against Cruel Sports, British, 288      U-2 aircraft tracked by, 177, 182, 184,
Soft Touch, Operation, 230-3 1                     185-87, 201, 227, 230-31, 299, 300,
South Korea, xv                                   306
Soviet Union:                                   U-2 pilot captured by, xix, 307, 308,
  Corona capsule recovered by, 285, 287            309,321
  Eastern European encroachment by,             violated airspace of, 5, 7-10, 46, 50, 56,
     16-18,282,293,328                             108, 169, 176-78, 184-85, 188-89,
  fighter aircraft of, 4-5,20-21,29,               283,284,291-92,293,306,310
     30-31,170,171,173,183,187,283,             World War II losses of, 18
     291,299-300,372                          Space Imaging, Incorporated, 367,
  initiation of U.S. aerial espionage on,           401
     xx, 46, 313                              space stations, 67
  military development of, xii, 13-14, 18,    Sperry, Elmer, 41
     20, 26, 82, 169-76, 187-88, 189,         Spica, Incorporated, 151
     272-78,315,326                           Spitzbergen Island, Corona capsule
  missile programs of, 22, 23-24, 82,               deposited on, 286, 287, 397
     170,172,174,175-76,189,200,              Spitzer, Lyman, Jr., 63
     210-1 1, 213-14, 215, 230, 239, 270,
                                              spotting system, 343-44
     272-78, 281, 282, 283-84, 290-91,        Sputnik 1, 211-13, 214-21, 223-24, 231,
     292, 293, 296, 298-99, 306, 323,              272,273,276,278,311,335
     326,335-37,352-53                        Sputnik II, 222-23, 231, 236, 273, 274,
  moon shots of, 293                               276
  nuclear capability of, xviii, 14, 15,       Sputnik V, 320
     18-19,20,21,170,230,315,326,
     357                                      spy satellites:
                                                 arms control monitored by, 228-29,
  and onset of cold war, 1 5-1 8, 20, 1 1 7         326,389
                                   Index          439


  bureaucratic disputes over control of,      Stimson, Henry, 58
     344-47                                   Stockman, Hervey, 184, 185, 186, 187,
  camera technology of, 32, 63, 65-66,              189, 193
     68, 69, 194, 199, 2 19, 226-27, 232,     Strategic Air Command (SAC), 274
     234,316-17                                  satellite development and, 69, 70
  capsule retrieval from, 32, 224—25, 226        Soviet airfields photographed by, 3-10
  combat operations aided by, 364—65,            U-2 pilots trained by, 158
     366, 367                                    vulnerability of, 12-13
  coverage capability of, xv, 64, 200, 203,      see also Air Force, U.S.
     232, 316-17, 322, 330, 343, 366, 367     Strategic Missiles Evaluation Committee,
  data processing systems for, 70, 362-65            88, 197
  data transmission from, 199-200, 201,       strategic reconnaissance, 37-38
     220, 225-26, 239, 249, 316-17, 325,      Strong, Philip, 85
     330,331,347-52                           suicide pills, 178-79
  declassified euphemisms for, 389            Sullivan, Walter, 216
  design studies for, 62-65, 68-70, 197       Sulzberger, Arthur Hays, 297
  development time and, 69-70, 71, 206,       supersonic aircraft, xvii, xviii, 72, 227,
     227-28                                         231,279-81,298,301,329,330,
  feasibility studies of, 61-65, 193, 196           333,338-43
  first launch of, 3 3                        surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), 298-99,
  funding of, 69, 201, 251, 318, 366                301,306
  initial conception of, 31-32                surprise attack, U.S. vulnerability to,
  KH-11, 347-52, 358, 360, 365-66                  29-30,31,71,82,85,171,173,176,
  legal sovereignty issues of, 70, 193-94          272,312
  missile launches detected by, 239, 317,     Sylvania, 336, 337
      352-53                                  Symington, Stuart, 170, 173-74, 175,
  new generation of, 365-67, 398                   213,272,275,278-79,281,296
  photographic detail of images from,         Syncomll, 352
     330, 343-44
  in polar orbit, 63, 267, 285, 286           Taber,John, 166
  potential uses of, 202-3                    tactical reconnaissance, 37-38
  radar-based imaging systems of, 330         Talbott, Harold E., xx, 11, 12, 101, 106,
                                                    107
  real-time imagery system in, 347-52,
     358                                      Talbott, Strobe, 357, 358
  rocket technology of, 194, 196, 199,        Talent-Keyhole, 326
      200,203,234-36,242,317                  TaskForcel.52,36,39
  secrecy of, xi, xv, 220, 230, 324, 330      Technological Capabilities Panel, 85-87,
  security breaches and, 330, 351,                 88,96,176
      353-54                                  Telemetry and Beacon Analysis
   see also Corona reconnaissance satellite        Committee, 337
Square Deal, Operation, 299-300               Tenet, George, 315
SR-7 1 , see Lockheed A- 1 2 Oxcart           Terman, Fred, 333-34
SS-6 missiles, 273, 276-77, 294               terrorist activities, U.S. intelligence on,
Stalin, Joseph, 15, 16-17, 18, 20, 25-26,           xiv, 330, 354, 356, 360-61, 362, 363,
      28,78,117                                     364,368,400
Stalker, Edward A., 74, 75                    Thomas, Evan, 116
Stans, Maurice, 251                           Thor rocket, 242^3, 247, 250-54,
stealth aircraft, 72, 189,337                       264-65,266,271,276,285,295,
Steuart Building, 157-58                            296,302,335
Stewart, Homer, 206, 207, 209-10              thrust cone, 260
                                     440     Index

Tiros I, 316-17                                funding
                                                 247 for, 108-9, 126-27, 139, 166,
titanium, 333, 340
Titan missiles, 199, 208, 254, 335            intelligence provided by, 34, 56, 188,
Touchdown, Operation, 292-93                     230,272,275,282,296,314,315,
Trichel, Gervais, 195                            328,335
Truax, Robert, 227                            interpretation of photography from,
Truman, Harry S, 17, 19, 67, 173                 153,156-58,166,181,322
   aerial espionage of Soviets approved       jet engines of, 80, 81, 107, 126, 130,
      by,xx,46,50,313                            164,165,300,305
   CIA established by, 25, 105                 landing system of, 80-81, 107, 132,
   postwar economic policy of, 117, 118,          144-45
      196-97                                   maximum altitude of, 129, 147, 167,
TRW, 198,353-54                                   300
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin, 2 3                   navigational instruments of, 164-65
                                               official name of, 140
TukeyJohnW, 96, 105-6
Tupolev aircraft, 20                           oil system of, 130-3 1
Twain, Mark (Samuel Clemens), 115              pilot environment in, 132-37, 165-66,
Twining, Nathan E, 180, 182, 185                  307
   Air Force control of spy flights sought     pilot training for, 1 58-66
     by, xx, 107-8, 148                        project management on, xiv, xvii, xx,
  military career of, xx, 70, 281                 12 1-27, 128-29, 229, 237, 238, 250
  on satellite program, 70, 287                proposals for, xix, 56, 72-73, 77, 79-85,
  on Soviet military threat, 171, 296             99-103, 105-9, 132
  U-2 flight resumption urged by, 281,         prototype production time for, xiv, 121,
     282,283                                      139-40,150,250,289
                                               radar detection of, 177, 182, 186-87,
UFO sightings, 139                                189,230-31,237
ullage rockets, 271                            secrecy of, 109, 122, 124, 126-27, 128,
United Nations, 15, 16, 19,205,216,358            129, 136, 138-39, 140, 146-47,
U-2C spy plane, 300                               159-60, 163, 165, 166, 167-68, 173,
U-2 (CL-282) spy plane:                           296-97,308-9,313
  camera system of, xvii, 99, 101-2, 107,      single-engine design of, 81, 85
     121,149-53,166,167,177,187,               Soviet downing of, xix, 166, 168, 177,
     188,248,257,258,303,304,307,                 178-79,270-71,291,298-301,
     314,322,323,327                              303-15,395
  CIA vs. Air Force control of, 99-109,        Soviet tracking of, 177, 182, 184,
     124, 126, 147-48, 159, 183                    185-87, 201, 227, 230-31, 299, 300,
  cruising altitude of, 33, 130, 164, 300,        306
     301,395                                   speed requirements of, 81, 164
  decisions on activation of, 141, 142,        suicide pills for pilots of, 178-79
     169-70, 176-79, 180, 181-89, 230,         takeoff of, 131-32, 143, 147, 164
     231, 253, 270-71, 281-85, 290-93,         tests of, xix, 137-40, 142-45, 147, 162,
     297,372                                      289
  end of Soviet missions of, 314— 15, 316,    views from, 165-66
     318,343                                  weather-research cover story for, 168,
  engineering team for, 128, 129                 182,184
  fleet production of, 106, 147, 148, 166     weight-saving features of, 79-8 1 , 131,
  flight range of, 165                           149,151
  fragilityof, 81, 131, 303,307               West German base used by, 181
  fuel used in, 80, 130,292,339               wing design for, 80, 1 3 1-32, 143
                                  Index           441


Vajpayee, Atal Bihari, 360                    Wheelon, Orville, 333, 340
Valentine, Jimmy, 7, 10                       Wheelwright, George W, III, 94
Van Allen, James, 202
                                              White, Lawrence "Red," 156-57
Vance, Cyrus, 347                             White, Lincoln, 309, 310
Vandenberg, Hoyt S., 264                      White House Scientific Advisory
Vandenberg Air Force Base, 230, 247,               Committee, 13,29, 82,85
     264, 265, 267                            Whitman, Ann, 107,311
Vanguard program, 193, 208, 209, 210,         Wienberg, Harold F "Bud," 49, 51, 53,
     215,216,217,223,230,234,
                                                   54,82,83,239-40
     235-36,246,254                           Wiesner, Jerome, 233, 334
Verne, Jules, 23                              Wilson, Charles E., 71, 107, 171, 174-75,
Vietnam War, xiii, 30, 116, 308, 343               203,214,217,384
Viking rockets, 207                           Wilson, Woodrow, 1 5
Vito, Carmine, 179, 185, 187                  wind tunnels, 41, 74, 139
von Braun, Wernher, 60, 67, 195, 196,         Wisner, Frank, 117-18, 119
     207-8,223,235-36,288                     Wisner, Frank, Jr., 358
von Fritsch, Werner, 155                      Wolfe, Tom, 160-61
von Hake, Richard, 74                         Wooldridge, Dean E., 198, 334
von Karman, Theodore, 41, 52, 57, 95          World Trade Center, 2001 assault on, xiv,
von Neumann, John, 88, 197, 198, 334               362
V-2 rockets, 22, 23, 60, 89, 194, 195, 196,   World War II:
     207                                        aerial reconnaissance in, 154, 155
                                                Allied intelligence deficits in, 25, 37
Washington, George, 115                         atomic bombs deployed in, 14, 35
Watergate affair, 308                           camera systems in, 40, 43 , 44—45
weather satellites, 62, 3 16-17                 D-Day Normandy landing in, 3 5,
Wells, H. G., 60
                                                   38
Welzenbach, Don, 98, 102, 147                   Soviet losses in, 18
Western Development Division, 198               Soviet-U.S. estrangement after,
Westinghouse Electric Company, 350                 15-18
Wheelon, Albert D. "Bud," vii, 34, 370          supply convoys in, 1 1 3 , 1 1 7
  background of, 329, 333-35, 345               tank warfare in, 263
  in bureaucratic conflicts, 329-30,            technological developments during,
     332-33,345-47                                 88-89,95,194,233
  CIA science-technology directorate led      WS- 1 1 7L satellite program, 217,
     by, xx, 328, 329, 330, 337-38                 227-28,231-32,245,251
  on Kelly Johnson, 77, 342                     on-board film processing of, 257
  on ground-based intelligence vs. spy          publicity for, 220, 230, 266, 267-
     satellites, 354-55                            268
  on Land, 92                                   rocket propulsion of, 199, 234, 242
  on missile guidance systems, 334—35           II- A recoverable capsule project of,
  new satellite technology begun by, xx,           233,234,238^0,268
     330-31, 344, 347-49, 350, 352-53,          video transmission of, 199-200, 201,
     365                                           225-26,239,249,331
  Soviet missile telemetry deconstructed      Wyatt,BenH., 36
    by, 335-37
  on supersonic plane project, 338, 340,      Yeager, Chuck, 136, 137
     341, 342, 343                            Yutzy, Henry, 100, 101
  on technical challenges in missile/
     satellite programs, 254, 295, 326        Zhukov, Georgi, 1 5
                ILLUSTRATION               CREDITS




Central Intelligence Agency: 9
Courtesy of Albert D. Wheelon: 18
Department of Defense: 20
D wight D. Eisenhower Library: 3
Federation of American Scientists: 19
National Archives and Record Administration, courtesy of Joshua
   Handler: 16
National Park Service/Dwight D. Eisenhower Library: 15
National Reconnaissance Office: 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17
U.S. Air Force: 5, 11
U.S. Navy/D wight D. Eisenhower Library: 1, 2
                                Sr




           DATE   DUE




/TXc


       8WQNM Branch Ubrwy
       *0 Academy HK! Rc*d  -
       Wghton, MA 0£136-&1*
                               "i tinued from front flap)


   Taubmai,                         'his dramatic story from the
White House t<_                           from the Pentagon to Lock-
         heed's Skunk Woi uurbank, from the secret U-2
test base in Nevada to the secret satellite assembly center
in Palo Alto and other locations here and abroad. He
reveals new information about the origins and evolution
of the projects and how close they came to failing
technically or falling victim to bureaucratic inertia and

Washington's turf wars.
    The incredibly sophisticated spies in the skies were
remarkably successful in proving that the missile gap
was a myth in protecting us from surprise Soviet
attack. But in some ways, the failure to detect the
planning for the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, can also be attributed to these powerful machines
as the government became increasingly dependent on
spy satellites to the neglect of human agents and infor-
         mants. Now, as we wage a new and more vicious war
against terrorism, we will need both machines in space
and spies on the ground to fight back.


                                 PHILIP TAUBMAN,
                                deputy editorial page editor of the
                                New York Times, has reported on
                                 national security and intelligence
                                 issues for more than twenty years.
                                The recipient of two Polk awards,
                                he was the Times?, Moscow bureau
                                 chief in the late 1980s and directed

the Washington bureau's coverage of the Persian Gulf
War. He lives in New York City.



          Visit    us     online        at www.simonsays.com


                  JACKET       DESIGN     BY MARC    J. COHEN

             FRONT COVER IMAGE OF GLOBE COURTESY OF
                EARTH IMAGING/STONE/GETTYIMAGES

           FRONT       COVER    IMAGE   OF SATELLITE COURTESY     OF
            ERIK SI'    ^NSENAHE        IMAGE   BANK/GETTYIMAGES

                                    \ PHOTOGRAPH BY
                                   RAD/ THE NEW YORK TIMES

                               JNTED     IN THE   U.S.A.

                          GHT     © 2003 SIMON      Sc SCHUSTER
                       J C E Rfc


S           CI          T
         itob<       the stow        -• dittos';
  nceivede
                                 4
    en told hi
         • .-
this absorl




Philip Taubm
adventure t             n doin

country a1

 the :
       ,.
forever changed tl




                                                   D3D3
