      CASS SERIES: STUDIES IN INTELLIGENCE
(Series Editors: Christopher Andrew and Michael I. Handel;
          Wesley K. Wark and Richard J. Aldrich)
                      ISSN 1368-9916



      Secrets of Signals Intelligence
         during the Cold War
               and Beyond
                                Also in this series

American-British-Canadian Intelligence Relations, 1939–2000 edited by
David Stafford and Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones

The Clandestine Cold War in Asia, 1945–65 edited by Richard J. Aldrich,
Gary Rawnsley and Ming-Yen Rawnsley

Allied and Axis Signals Intelligence in World War II edited by David Alvarez

The Norwegian Intelligence Service 1945–1970: Northern Vigil by Olav Riste

British Military Intelligence in the Crimean War, 1854–1856 by Stephen Harris

Intelligence and the Cuban Missile Crisis edited by James G. Blight and
David A. Welch

Knowing Your Friends: Intelligence Inside Alliances and Coalitions from 1914 to the
Cold War edited by Martin S. Alexander

Eternal Vigilance? 50 Years of the CIA edited by Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones and
Christopher Andrew

Nothing Sacred: Nazi Espionage Against the Vatican, 1939–1945 by David Alvarez
and Revd Robert A. Graham

Intelligence Analysis and Assessment edited by David Charters, A. Stuart Farson and
Glenn P. Hastedt

Intelligence and Imperial Defence: British Intelligence and the Defence of the Indian
Empire 1904–1924 by Richard J. Poppelwell

Espionage: Past, Present, Future? edited by Wesley K. Wark

Codebreaker in the Far East by Alan Stripp
Secrets of Signals Intelligence
    during the Cold War
         and Beyond



                    Editors
          MATTHEW M. AID
         Kroll Associates, Washington DC

               CEES WIEBES
  Netherlands Institute for War Documentation and
              University of Amsterdam




                FRANK CASS
          LONDON • PORTLAND, OR
                                First published 2001 in Great Britain by
                                     FRANK CASS PUBLISHERS
                                        2 Park Square, Milton Park,
                                       Abingdon, Oxon,OX14 4RN

                                 and in the United States of America by
                                    FRANK CASS PUBLISHERS
                                           270 Madison Ave,
                                          New York NY 10016


                                  Transferred to Digital Printing 2005


                                      Website: www.frankcass.com


                                Copyright © 2001 Frank Cass & Co. Ltd.



                             British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

                          Secrets of signals intelligence during the Cold War and
                            beyond. –(Studies inintelligence)
                             1. Electronic surveillance – History – 20th century –
                            Congresses 2. Cold War – Electronic intelligence –
                            Congresses
                             1. Aid, Matthew M. II. Wiebes, Cees
                             327.1’2’09045

                             ISBN 0 7146 5176 1 (cloth)
                             ISBN 0 7146 8182 2 (paper)
                             ISSN 1368-9916



                           Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

                  Secrets of signals intelligence during the Cold War and beyond / edited
                  by Matthew M. Aid & Cees Wiebes
                        p. cm. – (Cass series – studies in intelligence, ISSN 1368-9916)
                     Includes bibliographical references and index.
                     ISBN 0-7146-5176-1–ISBN0-7146-8182-2(pbk.)–ISBN       - ISBN 978-1-1352-8098-7
                                                                               978-1-1352-8098-7 (ebk.)(ebk)
                     1. Electronic intelligence – Congresses. 2. Electronic
                  surveillance–Congresses. 3. Cold War–Congresses. I. Aid, Matthew
                     M.,1958– . I I . Wiebes, Cees. III. Series.
                     UB255.S43 2001
                     327.12--dc21                                              2001028241


                     Printed and bound by Antony Rowe Ltd, Eastbourne


                         This group of studies first appeared in a Special Issue on
                   ‘Secrets of Signals Intelligence during the Cold War and Beyond’ of
                          Intelligence and National Security 16/1 (Spring 2001)
                               published by Frank Cass (ISSN 0268-4527).

All rights reserved. No part of this publlcation may be eeproduced, stored in nr introduced into a retrieval
   system or transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, phototopying, recording,
              or otherwise, without the prior wriiten permission of fhe eublisher of this book.

                       Jacket illustration : Aerial view of the US National
                        Security Agency's Sigint station at Bad Aibling,
                       Bavaria, Germany.
                                          Us Army Intelligence and Securtty Command
                             Contents



Foreword                                      Christopher Andrew      vii

List of Illustrations                                                 ix

Preface                                                               xi

 1. Introduction: The Importance of                 Matthew M. Aid
    Signals Intelligence in the Cold War            and Cees Wiebes    1

 2. The National Security Agency and the
    Cold War                                        Matthew M. Aid    27

 3. GCHQ and Sigint in the Early Cold War
    1945–70                                     Richard J. Aldrich    67

 4. Canada’s Communications Security
    Establishment from Cold War to Globalization     Martin Rudner    97

 5. The Bundesnachrichtendienst, the
    Bundeswehr and Sigint in the Cold War
    and After                          Erich Schmidt-Eenboom 129

 6. France, Sigint and the Cold War                   Roger Faligot 177

 7. Scandinavia, Sigint and the Cold War            Alf R. Jacobsen 209

 8. Dutch Sigint during the Cold War, 1945–94          Cees Wiebes 243

 9. Dutch Sigint and the Conflict with Indonesia,
    1950–62                                             WiesPlatje 285

10. Conclusions                                     Matthew M. Aid
                                                    and Cees Wiebes 313
Abstracts                333

About the Contributors   338

Index                    341
                              Foreword



Signals intelligence (Sigint) was the best kept secret of the Cold War – so
well preserved that most histories of that era do not even mention it. Though
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) quickly became a household name,
the National Security Agency (NSA), which runs American Sigint
operations, remained almost invisible throughout the Cold War. The small
circle of those in the know in Washington joked that NSA stood for ‘No
Such Agency’. NSA, however, has a far bigger budget than the CIA,
employs far more people, and generates far more intelligence.
    Since the end of the Cold War NSA has become a little less mysterious.
One veteran of the era of total secrecy complained to me a few years ago
that NSA now stood for ‘Nothing Sacred Anymore’. It still, however,
attracts far less public and scholarly interest than the CIA. Though Sigint is
a basic fact of modern international relations, even the word remains largely
unknown.
    Part of the reason why most scholars ignore Sigint is the continued
classification of most of the huge historical archive which it has generated.
The main reason for its neglect, however, has been what psychologists call
cognitive dissonance – the difficulty all of us have in grasping new concepts
which disturb our existing view of the world. Sigint is just such a concept.
Most scholars working on the international relations of the twentieth
century have been unable to come to terms with it.
    From 1945 onwards, for example, almost all histories of the Second
World War mentioned the American success in breaking the main Japanese
diplomatic cipher over a year before the attack on Pearl Harbor. But, until
the revelation of the Ultra Secret in 1973, it occurred to almost no historian
(save for former intelligence officers who were forbidden to mention it) that
there might have been major Sigint successes against Germany as well as
Japan. Even after the disclosure of Ultra’s important role in British and
American wartime operations in the West, it took another 15 years before
any historian raised the rather obvious question of whether there was a
Russian Ultra on the Eastern Front as well.1
    Many of the historians who now acknowledge the significance of Sigint
in the Second World War still ignore it completely in their studies of the
Cold War. This sudden disappearance of Sigint from the historical
landscape immediately after VJ Day has produced a series of eccentric
anomalies even in some of the leading studies of policy-makers and
international relations. Thus, for example, Sir Martin Gilbert’s massive and
mostly authoritative multi-volume official biography of Churchill
acknowledges his passion for Sigint as war leader but includes not a single
reference to his continuing interest in it as peacetime prime minister from
1951 to 1955. There is even less about Sigint in biographies of Stalin.
Indeed, it is difficult to think of any history of the Soviet Union which
devotes as much as a sentence to the enormous volume of Sigint generated
by the KGB and GRU.2 Studies of the presidency of George Bush (the first)
invariably ignore his candid admission that Sigint was a ‘prime factor’ in
his foreign policy – just as they neglect the use of Sigint by other post-war
presidents.3
    Hence the importance of this path-breaking collection edited by
Matthew M. Aid and Cees Wiebes. They and the other contributors to this
study have brought together a wider and more innovative range of material
on the role of Sigint since the Second World War than has ever been
published before. Sigint’s importance, as they demonstrate, extended far
beyond the Cold War superpowers. They are right to argue that intelligence
studies need to become more ‘internationalist’ and take more account of
intelligence in middle-ranking and minor powers, some of whom have
highly significant liaison arrangements with the major players.
    This volume confronts all historians of the Cold War and international
relations specialists with a major challenge which most so far have ducked:
either to seek to take account of the role of Sigint since the Second World
War or to explain why they do not consider it necessary to do so.

                                                          CHRISTOPHER ANDREW
                                                                Cambridge, May 2001

                                         NOTES

1. Geoff Jukes, ‘The Soviets and “Ultra”’, Intelligence and National Security 3/2 (April 1988)
   pp.233–47. Though Jukes’s conclusions are debatable, his article remains a path-breaking
   study.
2. Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin, The Mitrokhin Archive: The KGB in Europe and
   the West (London: Penguin 1999) Chapter 21.
3. Christopher Andrew, For The President’s Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American
   Presidency from Washington to Bush (London: HarperCollins 1995) p.5 and Chapter 13.
                           Illustrations



Figure 1.1   US Army 'Adventurer' border intercept site                8
Figure 1.2   US Army 'Hippodrome' space collection facility            8
Figure 2.1   US Army radio intercept operators                        48

Figure 2.2   AN/FRD-10 antenna array                                  48
Figure 2.3   Antenna tower                                            49
Figure 4.1   Canadian Communications Security Establishment HQ        98

Figure 4.2   Enigma cipher machine                                    100
Figure 4.3   Canadian Army Corps of Signals Sigint intercept station 102
Figure 4.4   Canadian satellite interception dish                     110

Map 5.1      Listening, direction-finding and radar installations
             of the Bundeswehr 1989                                  142
Map 5.2      Reconnaissance installations of the BND 1989             149
Figure 8.1   The HQ of the Dutch Defence Intelligence Agency         246
Figure 8.2   Secret targets for Dutch Sigint, January 1981          267-9
Figure 8.3   Dutch satellite intercept station                       270
Figure 9.1   Captain Henri Koot                                      289
Figure 9.2   Marid 6 at Hollandia                                    296
Figure 9.3   Marid 6 at Biak                                         297
Figure 9.4   Numbers of intercepted Indonesian messages               303
Figure 9.5   Hollandia staff buildings                                307
This page intentionally left blank
                               Preface



The Cold War passed into history in 1989–91 with the dissolution of the
Soviet Union and its allies bound together in the Warsaw Pact. The
American, Canadian and European intelligence communities had to change
their focus and attention shifted to different emerging threats like rogue
states, money laundering, drug kingpins, organised crime and terrorists but
also to environmental disasters and large-scale refugee problems. Partly
because of this transformation in the world of intelligence more and more
students of the Cold War begin to realise that the Western intelligence
communities played an important role between 1945 and 1990. In recent
years in particular the importance of Signals Intelligence (Sigint) has been
emphasised and especially the capabilities and possibilities of reading and
deciphering diplomatic, military, commercial and other communications of
foreign nations.
    This growing awareness of the importance of intelligence applies not
only to the activities of the big services but also to those of the smaller
nations like for example the Netherlands. For this exact reason a couple of
years ago the Netherlands Intelligence Studies Association (NISA) was
established in which academics and (former and still active) members of the
Netherlands intelligence community work together in order to promote
research into the history of Dutch intelligence communities. This growing
interest had led in Holland to publications dealing with the history of the
Dutch internal security service (1995), the Dutch Navy intelligence (1997)
and the Netherlands foreign intelligence service (1998).
    While the NISA hosts an international conference every two years it was
this time decided to organise a congress dealing with The Importance of
Sigint in Western Europe during the Cold War 1945–1999’. This conference
took place on Saturday 27 November 1999 in Amsterdam. The speakers
came from the United States, Norway, Germany, Great Britain, the
Netherlands and altogether six papers were presented. This Sigint work is a
spin-off of this conference, which was a great success with more than 100
participants from 11 different countries. The readers can not only find the
expanded version of the papers presented at this Sigint conference but also
additional contributions on the topic of Sigint in Canada and France. This
study also contains an introduction on the topic of the importance of Sigint
and will end with conclusions regarding the eight different contributions.
    Any questions regarding the activities of the NISA should be addressed
to P.O. Box 18 210, 1001 ZC Amsterdam, the Netherlands. The editors of
this work can be contacted at: Matthew M. Aid <mmaid@starpower.net>
and Cees Wiebes <wiebes@pscw.uva.nl>.
                                      1
                   Introduction:
                The Importance of
       Signals Intelligence in the Cold War

         MATTHEW M. AID and CEES WIEBES



Today, our knowledge of about the role and importance of Signals
Intelligence (Sigint) in the years after the end of World War II can only be
described as an inventory of ignorance. The distinguished British historian
Christopher Andrew has written that‘Thebiggest gap in our knowledge of
United States intelligence collection during the Cold War concerns the role
of Sigint. No history of the Second World War nowadays fails to mention
the role of the Anglo-American codebreakers in hastening victory over
Germany and Japan. By contrast, most histories of the Cold War make no
reference to Sigint at all.’1 By the same token, our lack of knowledge about
role played by Sigint in countries outside the United States is deeper and
even more profound.
     Part of the problem stems from the heavy shroud of secrecy that has
covered this immensely important subject for so long. Too many academics,
researchers and journalists in the US, Europe and elsewhere still speak
about the subject sotto voce, fearful of the strictures of the Official Secrets
Act and similar laws that effectively bar public discussion of this subject.
Another factor is that because of its technical nature, Sigint is an extremely
difficult subject for the layman to understand, which has deterred academics
and journalists from examining the subject in any depth, and what coverage
there has been remains focused on the trials and tribulations of World War
II.2
     It is certainly true that Sigint lacks the glamour and sex appeal that
surrounds the exploits and derring-do of secret agents, which have
dominated the post-war literature on intelligence. One writer has put it thus:
‘For many, Sigint conjures up images of grey men eavesdropping on
conversations, cracking codes, and installing large-dish antennas.
Compared with human intelligence, Sigint can seem rather boring and,
frankly, a little grubby.’3
2       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Moreover, partisans of the more traditional art of Human Intelligence
(Humint), have been less than kind to Sigint in the past. For years the
authors of this study have been told horror stories about the failings of
Sigint from past or present practitioners of Humint. Former CIA officials,
seeking to enhance the reputation of the CIA’s clandestine service, have
been particularly harsh in their public criticism of the National Security
Agency (NSA) and other forms of technical intelligence gathering. In the
best-selling novel Tinker, Tailor, Solder, Spy, George Smiley, John le Carré’s
master spy, voiced the widely-held opinion of many Humint professionals
about their more technically-oriented counterparts in the intelligence
services, saying: ‘We all have our prejudices and radio men are mine.
They’re a thoroughly tiresome lot in my experience, bad fieldmen and
overstrung, and disgracefully unreliable when it comes down to doing the
job.’4
    As a result, for more than 50 years Sigint professionals around the world
have been forced to fight in complete secrecy an uphill battle arguing the
value of radio intelligence. Oftentimes, the adherents of Sigint lost these
bureaucratic battles against the numerous and usually more powerful
partisans of Humint. A former senior Indian intelligence officer recalled
that ‘We dithered in creating an integrated set-up for signal interception...
because of the pressures from our sprawling network of spies and human
analysts, led by a technically illiterate bureaucracy.’5
    And so, despite the latent prejudice and immense secrecy surrounding
the subject, the question has been asked: why was Sigint so important
during the Cold War? This contribution and the others that follow suggest
that the history of post-World War II intelligence must be radically rewritten
to take into account the important contributions made to the security of the
United States and the nations of Western Europe by this arcane and difficult
to understand intelligence discipline.

WHAT IS SIGNALS I N T E L L I G E N C E ?

An US Army publication defines Sigint as intelligence derived from the
intercept, analysis, and parametric exploitation of foreign communications
and non-communications radio-electronic emissions.6 An US Marine Corps
manual defines Signals Intelligence (Sigint) as ‘intelligence gained by
exploiting an adversary’s use of the electromagnetic spectrum with the aim
of gaining undetected firsthand intelligence on the adversary’s intentions,
dispositions, capabilities, and limitations’.7
    Sigint is composed of three separate but interrelated intelligence
collection techniques: communications intelligence (Comint), electronics
intelligence (Elint), and foreign instrumentation signals intelligence
INTRODUCTION                                                                 3

(Fisint).8 Communications Intelligence (Comint) is intelligence information
derived from the intercept and processing of voice, Morse code,
radioteletype, facsimile, multichannel (or microwave radio relay), and video
signals. Comint does not include the interception of unencrypted written
communications (mail), the monitoring of foreign public media or
propaganda broadcasts, the interception of communications obtained during
counterintelligence investigations, or wartime censorship activities.9
    For example, during the 1950s and 1960s NSA intercept operators
around the world spent most of their time monitoring and transcribing radio
traffic concerning the day-to-day routine activities at foreign military bases
around the world, such as communications from airfield control towers or
ground stations directing aircraft movements, the radio traffic of ground
forces manoeuvring in the field, ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore naval radio
traffic, foreign military and civilian weather broadcasts, and air-to-ground
civilian airline communications.10 During the Cold War, a typical American
Comint target was the routine activity at Soviet airfields in East Germany
and elsewhere. NSA voice intercept operators monitored the early morning
radio checks from the air base, followed by radio traffic among the control
tower, the firing range controller, the taxi strip monitor, the bombing range
controller, the weather station, the aerial intercept controller, the ground
safety crews, and the radar operators. The intercept operators then tracked
the routine training flights of the base’s combat aircraft as they practised
aerial intercepts or bombing attacks at ranges near the airfield. This required
listening to hours of mundane air-to-air and/or air-to-ground radio chatter,
which in turn required further hours to transcribe and process every day.11
    Electronics Intelligence (Elint) is concerned with the interception and
analysis of emissions from foreign electronic devices. The most common
Elint targets are the wide variety of radar systems used around the world for
early warning, missile detection, ground control intercept, missile targeting,
fighter target vectoring, and altitude determination.12 Through Elint, these
radar systems can be identified by their function and type, their range and
capabilities assessed, and their locations precisely fixed.13 This intelligence
information is principally of interest to the military because, as a recently
declassified US Air Force document put it: ‘By counting radars, specifying
their precise location, determining their ranges, and evaluating their
operational systems, analysts and engineers could develop countermeasures
capable of jamming offensive surface-to-air missile radars and other
defensive radars.14 Other Elint targets include navigation aids and radio
beacons which provide geographic position information to ships, aircraft
and other vehicles; air-to-air and air-to-ground identification signals, such
as Identification, Friend or Foe (IFF) transponders, repeaters and
interrogators; emissions from countermeasures equipment and radio
4       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

jamming devices; radiation from missile guidance systems and artillery
fuses; and emissions from meteorological devices, diathermy, radio heating,
and research and development laboratories and field testing stations
working on electronic devices.15
    Fisint is defined as the collection and processing of emissions associated
with the testing and operational deployment of aerospace, surface, and
subsurface systems, which may have either military or civilian application.
Fisint includes but is not limited to monitoring telemetry from ballistic
missiles as well as manned and unmanned space vehicles, beaconry,
electronic interrogators, tracking/fusing/arming/command systems, and
video data links which relay data to a ground station concerning
performance of space vehicles or weapons systems. As such, Fisint is the
Sigint collection discipline primarily associated with the monitoring of
foreign weapons research and development activities, including but not
limited to ballistic missile testing.16
    Finally, in the last decade Sigint has become deeply involved with a new
kind of electronic communications medium: digital data communications
signals, which refers to the transmission of vast amounts of digital data
among and between computer systems and networks. A good example of
the traffic passing along this medium is electronic bank transfer data. NSA
and its English-speaking Sigint partners refer to data traffic by the
covername ‘Proforma’.17

THE IMPORTANCE OF SIGINT

Since the dawn of time, all governments have wanted to know what their
friends and allies were doing. In justifying the continuing need for the huge
Russian radio intercept station at Lourdes, Cuba, in December 2000 the
Russian newspaper Izvestia wrote that ‘Not a single state has yet been able
to deny itself the temptation to learn more about other states (especially those
it sees as rivals) than they would like to tell.’18 And that the easiest way to do
this is to listen to the secret communications of foreign governments. The
former head of the US Navy Communications Intelligence Organisation,
Captain (later Vice Admiral) Joseph N. Wenger, wrote that ‘The ambition of
every nation has been to develop unbreakable ciphers for its own use and to
solve every cipher in use by its actual or potential enemies.’19
    By its very nature, Sigint has certain intrinsic qualities, which make it a
particularly effective intelligence-gathering tool.
    The first is that Sigint is a passive intelligence collection technique that
generally is conducted without the target’s knowledge. Moreover, Sigint
collects information against communications targets that are oftentimes
thousands of miles away, thus negating the need for the intercept sites to be
INTRODUCTION                                                                 5
near the targets being monitored. This means, generally speaking, that
Sigint involves relatively little political or physical risk.20 There was one
exception to this rule, however. This was the peripheral aerial and maritime
reconnaissance missions conducted by all sides during the Cold War, which
resulted in a number of reconnaissance platforms either being destroyed or
captured. A total of 146 NSA military and civilian personnel were killed in
the line of duty during the Cold War, 60 of whom were killed in Vietnam.
The single worst loss occurred during the Israeli attack on the NSA spy ship
USS Liberty in June 1967, which resulted in the death of 34 Navy, Marine
and NSA civilian cryptologists.21
    By comparison, Humint collection during the Cold War was a
particularly risky proposition. For example, the CIA, MI6, as well as the
Norwegian, French, West German, and Turkish intelligence services lost
more than 300 agents during attempts to infiltrate the Soviet Union between
1949 and 1955; plus several hundred more operatives who were lost trying
to establish agent networks in Eastern Europe during the 1950s.22 Between
1951 and 1953, 212 Chinese agents trained by the CIA were parachuted into
northern China. According to declassified CIA documents, 101 of the
agents were killed and 111 were captured.23 Of the 49 CIA agents
parachuted into Chinese-occupied Tibet between 1957 and 1960, only 12
survived. Of the remainder, 37 were killed or committed suicide, one
surrendered, and one was captured by the Chinese.24 Between 1958 and
1966, the CIA and Taiwanese lost 120 agents who were parachuted into
mainland China as part of an operation called ‘Grosbeak’.25 Finally,
according to a recent South Korean news report, between 1950 and 1972 a
staggering 7,726 Korean agents working for American or South Korean
intelligence were killed or disappeared while spying inside North Korea.26
    Second, the objectivity and reliability of Sigint is great, but far from
perfect. Former CIA Director Vice Admiral Stansfield Turner wrote in 1991
‘electronic intercepts may be even more useful [than agents] in discerning
intentions. For instance, if a foreign official writes about plans in a message
and the United States intercepts it, if he discusses it and we record it with a
listening device, those verbatim intercepts are likely to be more reliable than
second-hand reports from an agent.’27 A retired senior CIA officer opined
that Humint can never be free from the biases and perceptions of its sources,
that the information is oftentimes deemed tainted because it came from
traitors motivated by greed or personal grievances, or that it was obtained
by corrupting or seducing vulnerable human beings.28 But in its raw form,
Sigint reproduces exactly what it records in an unvarnished, unbiased and
undistorted fashion. This historically has given Sigint tremendous
credibility with intelligence consumers, particularly since paranoia on both
sides of the Iron Curtain created an atmosphere that led analysts inherently
6       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

to question the credibility of every secret agent that came forward. A former
CIA intelligence analyst was quoted as saying of Sigint’s reliability that
‘You know the origin and you know that this is genuine. It’s not like a
clandestine [Humint] report where you don’t know if this is a good agent or
a weak agent or a bad agent or a double agent.’29 But another CIA officer
was recently quoted as saying of Sigint that ‘Electronic intercepts are great,
but you don’t know if you’ve got two idiots talking on the phone’,
suggesting that the reliability of a particular intercept is largely dependent
on the seniority of the sender and receiver of the transmission.30
    For example, some senior CIA intelligence analysts questioned the
reliability of the information provided by Colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, in large
part because the CIA’s Clandestine Service would not tell them where the
information came from.31 A Top Secret 1976 study of CIA estimates on the
Soviet military found that ‘Because the Soviet Union remains a uniquely
closed society, human contacts, traditionally the principal source of foreign
intelligence, play a distinctly subordinate role in the preparation of these
documents: not only is such information exceedingly scarce, but it is always
suspect of being the product of a deliberate disinformation effort in which
the Soviet government engages on a massive scale. Furthermore,
information obtained from sensitive human sources often has such limited
distribution that it does not play a significant part in the preparation of NIEs
[National Intelligence Estimates].’32
    Third, unlike other sources, some but certainly not all Sigint intercepts
can stand on their own without the need for analysis or correlation with other
sources, although practitioners of the Sigint craft and ‘all-source’
intelligence analysts screech in dismay whenever this occurs. This led to the
practice during the Cold War of the President of the United States and senior
White House officials getting each morning a Top Secret intelligence
summary from the CIA and an even more highly classified publication called
the Black Book, containing the most important decrypts produced by NSA
during the previous 24 hours, along with the Agency’s commentary.33 The
same was true in the Soviet Union, where every day the KGB sent a selection
of key intercepts in a bound volume called the Red Book to the top six
members of the Politburo, although the KGB did not forward any materials
contained in the decrypts which ran contrary to the prevailing political trends
of the time within the Kremlin.34 In Britain, the daily Sigint digest produced
by GCHQ for the Prime Minister and senior Cabinet officials was called the
Blue Book.35 Individual Sigint reports produced by GCHQ were called Blue
Jackets (BJs) because of the distinctive blue-coloured file folders that the
reports came in.36 The highly classified daily collection of diplomatic
decrypts that was sent daily to the Dutch Cabinet was called the Green
Edition. There were also special daily reports containing Sigint materials on
INTRODUCTION                                                                    7
the Middle East (Red Edition), Latin America (Yellow Edition), and on
economic intelligence matters (Blue Edition).37
    Fourth, because of its reliability and the high-level attention that
intelligence derived from Sigint received on both sides of the Iron Curtain,
it proved to be (with apologies to U-2 and spy satellite aficionados) the
premier source of information for national security officials and foreign
policymakers during the Cold War. In 1966, Senator Milton Young of North
Dakota stated that ‘As far as foreign policy is concerned, I think the
National Security Agency and the intelligence it develops has far more to
do with foreign policy than does the intelligence developed by the CIA.’38
In October 1998, John Millis, the late staff director of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence, described Sigint as ‘the INT of choice of
the policy maker and the military commander’.39 For example, Sigint has
been used publicly by the US government in a number of instances, such as
the Tonkin Gulf incidents (1964), the North Korean seizure of the USS
Pueblo in 1968, and the C-130 (1958), EC-121 (1969), KAL 007 (1983) and
Brothers to the Rescue (1996) shootdown incidents. President Ronald
Reagan publicly justified the 1986 air strikes on Libya using NSA intercepts
that reportedly linked Libya to the La Belle Disco bombing in West Berlin.
By contrast, rare indeed have been the instances where major policy
decisions have been significantly influenced or determined solely by
information received from a human intelligence source.
    Fifth, Sigint was usually the fastest source of current intelligence
information available to consumers. A congressional intelligence
committee official said of Sigint that ‘it’s there quickly when needed’.40
Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham, the former Director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency (DIA), was quoted as saying ‘Most collection agencies
give us history. The NSA is giving us the present.’41 During the Cold War,
NSA emphasised the speedy delivery of finished Sigint to its customers
because of the perishable nature of the product. Today, thanks to
improvements in communications and data processing technologies, NSA
can get the results of its Sigint collection efforts to its consumers in the field
in near real-time.42 NSA had its own dedicated communications system just
for transmitting intercepts to Fort Meade, and another special distribution
network called the SSO system for getting the finished product from NSA
headquarters to its consumers. Between 1962 and 1965, NSA placed into
operation the Critical Intelligence Communications (CRITICOMM), which
allowed each of NSA’s 150 Sigint collection and processing units around the
world to bypass normal communications channels and transmit especially
important intelligence information to Washington DC within 15 minutes.43
NSA even had its own direct communications link with the White House,
which was established shortly after the Cuban Missile Crisis, to feed the
8         SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                        FIGURE 1.1




US Army ‘Adventurer’ border intercept site in South Korea.
                                                      US Army Intelligence and Security Command


                                        FIGURE 1.2




US Army ‘Hippodrome’ space collection facility at Sinop, Turkey.
                                                      US Army Intelligence and Security Command
INTRODUCTION                                                                9
President of the United States and the National Security Council with key
decrypts, thus bypassing the analysts at the CIA and DIA.44
    As a result, Sigint intercepts usually found their way to consumers in far
less time than imagery interpretation reports from satellites, and usually
arrived weeks before Humint reports found their way to the hands of
intelligence analysts.45 For example, during the Cuban Missile Crisis in
 1962, most CIA agent reporting from inside Cuba was accomplished by
secret writing, which took a week or more to get to the CIA analysts from
inside Cuba. Information derived from refugee interrogations was
oftentimes months old by the time the Cubans were questioned by the CIA
at Opa Locka, Florida.46
    The Soviet experience was also the same. During the war in Afghanistan
during the 1980s, the Russian Army depended on radio intercepts as their
primary means of locating major units of Afghan guerrillas. The principal
reason for the dependence on Sigint was that Russian field commanders
found that the Humint reports that they received from the Afghan secret
service – the Khad – almost always arrived to late to be of any tactical
value.47 This has meant that one of Sigint’s most important functions was to
provide forewarning of an enemy attack, something which slower
intelligence sources, especially Humint, could not provide.
    Sixth, Sigint produces more intelligence information on a broader range
of subjects than any other intelligence source. In 1964 alone, NSA sent out
approximately 150,000 finished intelligence reports and translations to its
consumers in Washington, or more than 400 Sigint reports a day. By the end
of the 1960s, this figure more than doubled to almost 400,000 finished
intelligence reports being produced annually, which is the equivalent of
more than 1,000 Sigint reports going to NSA’s consumers every day.48 By
comparison, in 1960 the KGB deciphered 209,000 diplomatic cables sent by
51 countries, or the equivalent of 572 decrypts a day going to consumers.49
In 1967, the KGB deciphered 188,400 diplomatic messages sent by 72
countries, or 516 decrypts a day.50
    Seventh, Sigint never sleeps. Agents and their handlers must sleep (we
are after all only human!), and darkness or adverse weather could shut down
imagery collection systems for weeks at a time. But Sigint collects and
produces intelligence 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, regardless of the
weather or other environmental conditions.51
    Eighth, Sigint is flexible and more responsive to consumer tasking than
most other intelligence sources. A 1998 congressional report stated that
‘much of NSA’s past strength has come from its localised creativity and
quick-reaction capability’.52 You can quickly retarget Sigint, assuming that
you possess the appropriate collection platforms and the manpower with the
requisite skills to perform the mission. This made Sigint the source of
10      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

choice during fast moving world crises during the Cold War. For example,
NSA was able to react to a series of Cold War crises faster than the rest of
the US intelligence community, such as the Korean War, the Cuban Missile
Crisis, and the Vietnam conflict.53 You cannot, however, quickly change the
tasking of agents nor build a new agent network overnight (unless of course
you are a reporter for CNN); and the cost of retasking a spy satellite (and
thus shortening its orbital life) was prohibitively expensive.
    Ninth, intelligence insiders argue that Sigint’s potential as an
intelligence source is greater than all other intelligence collection
disciplines. One successful solution of a major foreign cryptographic
system can generate more intelligence information in a day than all other
sources combined. A former American defence and intelligence official has
written that a ‘break’ is the ‘equivalent not of one but of a thousand spies,
all ideally placed, all secure, and all reporting instantaneously’.54 Even such
a stalwart believer in Humint as the late Allen W. Dulles, the Director of the
CIA from 1953 to 1961, opined that Sigint was ‘the best and “hottest”
intelligence that one government can gather about another’.55
    And tenth, relative to all other intelligence disciplines, many intelligence
‘insiders’ consider Sigint to be one of the most cost effective means of
gathering intelligence. American intelligence observers believe, for
example, that despite NSA’s huge workforce and budget, it produces on a
dollar-for-dollar basis more ‘bang for the buck’ than any other intelligence
source, with perhaps the exception of the National Reconnaissance Office’s
spy satellites.56 This has been an extremely contentious issue within the US
intelligence community for decades because of NSA’s huge budget. The
authors estimate that NSA and its predecessors have spent about $100
billion since 1945, 75 per cent of which was spent on Sigint and the rest on
communications security.57 More importantly, throughout the Cold War the
US government spent four to five times as much money on Sigint than they
did on Humint collection.58
     There are no hard figures available for how much the Soviet Union and
its allies spent on Sigint, but according to a former KGB official, by the late
 1980s, Sigint collection was eating up 25 per cent of the KGB’s annual
budget.59 But what is now clear is that by the early 1980s, the Soviet
intelligence community, in particular the GRU, had come to depend to a
greater degree on Comint because it proved to be a more productive source
for strategic intelligence than the more traditional Humint sources.60
According to a 1993 statement by Cuban Defence Minister Raul Castro,
Russia got about 75 per cent of its strategic military intelligence information
from the huge listening post at Lourdes, Cuba.61
     The East German Sigint organisation, Hauptverwaltung III, was
particularly successful during the Cold War. Throughout the 1970s and
INTRODUCTION                                                             11
1980s, the East German Sigint service eavesdropped on the telephone
conversations of almost every important West German politician, including
the sensitive conversations of former West German chancellor Helmut
Kohl. The former head of the East German Sigint organisation, Major
General Horst Männchen, told an interviewer that during the early 1980s,
his service was intercepting approximately 40,000 West German telephone
conversations per year, including those of the most senior members of the
West German government.62
    The result is that, as will be demonstrated throughout this work, Sigint
was arguably the most important intelligence source for the US and its
European allies during the Cold War. And since the demise of the Soviet
Union, one can argue that the relative importance of Sigint has only
increased. In the late 1950s, Sigint and U-2 imagery were producing about
75 per cent of the hard information available to the US intelligence
community about the Soviet military.63
    Dependence on Sigint by many Western European nations was even
greater. For example, during the 1980s the vast majority (80–90 per cent)
of the raw intelligence information reaching the British Joint Intelligence
Committee in London every day came from Sigint.64 In May 1999,
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook stated that ‘GCHQ’s work is vital in
supporting our foreign and defence policies.’65 The 2000 Annual
Report of the British Parliament’s Intelligence and Security Committee
revealed that ‘The quality of the intelligence gathered [by GCHQ] clearly
reflects the value of the close co-ordination under the UKUSA
agreement.’66
    Sigint also accounted for the majority of the intelligence information
generated by the Canadian intelligence community.67 One informed
observer has written that Canada’s national Sigint organisation, the
Communications Security Establishment (CSE), is that country’s premier
intelligence producer, adding that CSE was Canada’s ‘single-most
important contributor to allied intelligence sharing agreements’.68
    A 1952 French report stated that‘Thestudy of enemy radio is by far our
best source of intelligence.’69 A 1973 memorandum to the Dutch Prime
Minister described that nation’s Sigint organisation as ‘[T]he most valuable
asset we have to collect an intelligence product that is valuable to all
interested parties.’70

P R O B L E M S AND LIMITATIONS OF SIGINT

The following is a short summary of some of the basic weaknesses and
limitations of Sigint, some of which apply to many of the other intelligence
disciplines as well:
12      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Secrecy of Sigint: Historically, because of the need to protect sensitive
sources, Sigint intercepts were given extremely limited distribution with the
highest levels of government and the military, and even then, only on a
need-to-know basis.71 A declassified 1952 US Army memorandum states:
‘It is fully realised that enemy communications are probably the most
sensitive of all intelligence sources, and that every precaution must be taken
to protect the security of our efforts to exploit them.’72 Each Comint report
coming out of NSA during the 1950s and 1960s stated on its cover that
‘This document is to be distributed and read by only those persons who are
officially indoctrinated in accordance with communications intelligence
security regulations and who need the information in order to perform their
duties.’
    There are numerous examples of the negative ramifications stemming
from the decision to keep Sigint under wraps. The first was that few
government officials ever came to fully appreciate Sigint. For example, a
former senior NSA official has written that this high degree of secrecy
‘preserved the anonymity (but also limited the appreciation) of the source’
within the US intelligence community.73 This also meant that, in many
instances, government officials and military commanders who needed the
information were denied access to Sigint because someone had determined
that they did not have the ‘need-to-know’.
    A 1951 report concerning Comint support to the US Army during the
Korean War found that the effectiveness of this crucial intelligence source
was limited, in large part because the high security classification level of the
intercepts prevented all but a few senior Army officers in Korea from seeing
them. In addition, Army intelligence officers in Korea were barred by
Comint security regulations from merging Comint with other forms of
intelligence (such as Photint or Humint) into an ‘all-source’ intelligence
product; and the sensitivity of the source oftentimes prevented Army field
commanders from using the Comint information, leading some senior Army
commanders in Korea to refer to Comint as a ‘wasting asset’.74 A 1951
report by a US Air Force inspection team found that Comint intercepts
being generated by listening posts in Japan were so highly classified that
they could not be distributed to most USAF intelligence consumers in
Korea.75 US Navy commanders in the Far East were also complaining that
few combat commanders ever saw either tactical or strategic Comint during
the Korean War because they did not possess the requisite security
clearances.76
    During the Vietnam War, NSA’s Sigint coverage of North Vietnamese
MiG flight activity was excruciatingly detailed and accurate, but because of
security concerns NSA refused to give this highly perishable intelligence to
the American pilots flying combat missions over North Vietnam. When
INTRODUCTION                                                                13
senior US Air Force and Navy commanders in Southeast Asia found out that
NSA was collecting intelligence that could save the lives of American
pilots, but was not distributing the intelligence because of security concerns,
they were understandably furious.77 Voicing the opinion of many soldiers in
Southeast Asia, Command Sergeant Major John Martin, who served with
the US Army Special Forces in Vietnam, recalled ‘Because they [the US
Army Sigint units and personnel] were so “special” you could never get
them to work for you; you could only hope they would share something if
it could save your ass. Other than those unusual situations, their info was
just “too special” for us average boonie rats.’78
    In the mid-1980s, American officials frequently hinted that they
had ‘indisputable evidence’ [i.e. Sigint] demonstrating Nicaraguan and
Cuban support for guerrilla forces operating in El Salvador. Despite calls
for the evidence to be made public, the Reagan administration refused
to release the materials because it would jeopardise sensitive intelligence
sources and methods. This led a former CIA intelligence analyst to remark
that ‘Radio intercepts are not so novel, or so critical. They won’t jeopardise
anything... I can’t believe that in the past years they wouldn’t have
been produced – so critical is this matter to US policy.’ The analyst added
that ‘You don’t save these expensive intelligence sources for the junior
prom.’79
    The United States was not the only country that applied these stringent
security measures to protect their Sigint product. In the Soviet Union, Sigint
intercepts were deemed so sensitive that they were delivered directly to a
very small number of specially cleared consumers in the Politburo, the KGB
and the GRU, thus bypassing regular intelligence analysis channels. Sigint
sharing with the Soviet Union’s allies in Eastern Europe was also
specifically forbidden.80
    In the British Foreign Office, a special messenger from the FO’s
Permanent Under Secretary’s Department would periodically deliver copies
of the Top Secret Blue Jacket reports from GCHQ to those few officials
cleared to see them. After reading the reports, the GCHQ material was given
back to the messenger, who returned them to the Permanent Under
Secretary’s office for storage. The rule was that there was never to be any
mention of decrypts in official Foreign Office papers.81
    In October 1975, senior officials of the Australian Sigint organisation,
now known as the Defence Signals Directorate (DSD), apparently decided
not to send to the Australian Prime Minister a sensitive intercept which
revealed that the Indonesian military intended to kill five Australian
journalists in East Timor covering the Indonesian invasion of that country.
The DSD officials feared that Prime Minister Gough Whitlam would act on
the information, thus revealing DSD’s ability to read sensitive Indonesian
14      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

communications traffic. All five of the journalists were murdered by
Indonesian special forces troops, and their bodies burned.82
    Diminished Utility: The ability of consumers to use Sigint was strictly
limited because of pervasive security considerations.83 For example, during
the Korean War, American Top Secret intelligence reports derived from
Comint carried the following caveat emptor: ‘Certain restrictions prohibit
the further dissemination of this information either direct or paraphrased.
Pertinent order of battle information included herein, that is not confirmed
by other sources will be passed to divisions on a “need to know basis” only
and will not be included in any routine intelligence reports or summaries.’84
    During the 1950s and 1960s, every NSA Comint report carried the
following edict on its cover: ‘No action is to be taken on information herein
reported, regardless of temporary advantage, if such action might have the
effect of revealing the existence and nature of the source.’85 Because of these
limitations, US government officials and military commanders oftentimes
found themselves severely circumscribed in how they could act on the
Sigint that they received, which naturally diminished the utility of the
intelligence to its consumers.86
    Failure to believe Sigint: Cold War history is replete with many
examples of government officials, military commanders, and intelligence
analysts who chose not to believe the Sigint they received. In part, this was
because the reader did not understand the information they received, or trust
the reliability of the Sigint source. More often then not, the Sigint was
misused or ignored because it did not fit some preconceived notion already
held by the reader. Field-Marshal Lord Montgomery and General Douglas
MacArthur, for example, were two commanders who did not particularly
trust Sigint unless it confirmed their own personal assessments.87
    During the Chinese Civil War, American intelligence analysts failed to
heed information contained in decrypted Soviet clandestine radio traffic
between Moscow and Mao Tse-tung’s headquarters in Yenan, China, which
revealed that as of October 1945, Mao’s People’s Liberation Army
consisted of almost 1.1 million men under arms. A year later, in mid-1946,
the US Army G-2 still was estimating that Mao’s forces consisted of only
600,000 men, despite the fact that the PLA had by that time probably grown
to almost two million men under arms.88 During the war in Indochina in the
early 1950s, some senior French commanders chose not to believe the
information contained in decrypts of high-level Viet Minh military radio
traffic because it did not match their assessments of the strength and
capabilities of Ho Chi Minh’s forces.89
    Over-Reliance on Sigint. There are numerous examples of intelligence
officials and military commanders placing undue reliance on Sigint to the
exclusion of other sources of intelligence information. For instance, by the
INTRODUCTION                                                              15
late 1950s the US intelligence community was relying almost exclusively
on Comint to provide warning of a Soviet military attack. Former senior
CIA official Lyman Kirkpatrick stated that ‘If the Soviets ever decided to go
for broke, they wouldn’t put anything on electronic communications or do
anything visible by satellite. All the orders would go by officer couriers,
which was what Hitler did at the Battle of the Bulge and caught us totally
unprepared. We were relying too heavily on communications intelligence.’90
    By the late 1970s, the US intelligence community had become so
dependent on Sigint that in 1978, President Jimmy Carter said ‘Recently...
I have been concerned that the trend that was established about 15 years ago
to get intelligence from electronic means might have been over-
emphasised.’91 A declassified 1976 CIA intelligence assessment confirmed
that the Soviets also largely depended on Sigint as their primary source for
strategic warning of a nuclear or conventional attack.92
    The results of over-reliance on Sigint can be disturbing. The system
backfired in November 1983, when Soviet Sigint stations in East Germany
and Czechoslovakia detected the sudden cessation of radio traffic coming
from American nuclear weapons units in West Germany, particularly among
the units of the US Army’s 56th Artillery Brigade, which was armed with
Pershing nuclear missiles. This was followed by a change of ciphers and
radio frequencies throughout the US Seventh Army. The Soviets interpreted
these moves as indicative of an imminent nuclear attack by the US. In fact,
it was only a nuclear release exercise, called ‘Able Archer 83’.93
Nevertheless, the Soviets were so alarmed that they placed many of their
forces in Eastern Europe on alert. Between 2 and 11 November 1983,
American and British Sigint stations in West Germany detected Soviet
ground forces in East Germany and the Baltic Military District going to a
heightened readiness status; Soviet air units in East Germany and Poland
were placed on alert and routine training flights suddenly stopped; Soviet
nuclear-capable fighter bombers were placed on runway alert on airfields in
East Germany; and the Soviets suddenly ceased broadcasting weather
reports throughout the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.94
    More recently, on 11 May 1998, the government of India tested three
nuclear devices at the Pokhran nuclear test site in western India. Not
surprisingly, the Indian nuclear tests dramatically heightened the state of
tension between India and neighbouring Pakistan. Two weeks later, on 27
May 1998, the Signals Intelligence Directorate of the Indian Army
intercepted and decrypted a message from the Pakistani Foreign Ministry in
Islamabad to the Pakistani High Commission in New Delhi, which reported
that Pakistan had ‘credible information’ that India was ready to mount a pre-
emptive strike against Pakistani nuclear installations. The following day, 28
May 1998, Pakistan conducted its own series of nuclear tests. India publicly
16      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

denied that it had any intention of attacking Pakistani military installations,
but the military forces of the two countries remained on hair-trigger alert for
many weeks afterwards.95
    Sigint Snobbery. As the importance of Sigint grew during the years after
World War II, followed by the introduction of spy satellites in the 1960s, the
value of Humint was rapidly marginalised within the American and British
intelligence communities.96 This led to a pervasive sense of snobbery and
self-infatuation by the denizens of the Sigint community in the West.
Intelligence insiders referred to this elitism as the ‘Green Door’ syndrome.
This led Humint partisans to complain that greater credence was almost
always given to Sigint over Humint.97 A recently declassified NSA history
noted that during the 1950s, many high-level intelligence reports referred to
Humint and other collateral intelligence as ‘unconfirmed information’. Only
Sigint was deemed reliable enough to be described as ‘a usually reliable
source’.98
    Talking about his experiences with the US Army Sigint organisation, the
Army Security Agency (ASA), during the Vietnam War, one US Army
officer wrote:99
      ASA came very close to total alienation from the [US Army] combat
      arms. This seemed to result partly from the avid devotion [by ASA]
      to the strategic [Comint] mission and its highly classified and
      controlled product, as well as a self-imposed snobbery and self-
      infactuation. Every combat arms officer from the Vietnam War I’ve
      met has his own story of the ‘green door’ syndrome and hyper-
      classification of signal intelligence from ASA. While ASA served the
      combat troops better than they realised during the conflict, the
      superior and separatist attitude of even tactical ASA units has left a
      bad taste in the mouths of many commanders even to this day. Those
      who don’t dread our attachment to their commands in the future look
      forward to ‘straightening us out’ and making ‘real’ soldiers of us.
    The Fragmentary Nature of Sigint: Sigint usually will provide hundreds
if not thousands of pieces of a complex puzzle, but rarely will it yield the
entire puzzle. Much of the information obtained by Sigint is fragmentary
and indirect, requiring that analysts patiently sift through hundreds or
thousands of intercepts in order to piece together the pieces of a puzzle.
Even then, the puzzle more often than not remains largely incomplete, as in
the case of the much-touted Venona decrypts. The fragmentary nature of
most decrypts make them extremely difficult to understand, much less
use.100 A senior American intelligence official was quoted as saying that
‘You rarely get a Sigint smoking gun. It’s usually very fragmentary... Very
often you don’t even know who you’re listening to.’101 Voicing a feeling
INTRODUCTION                                                               17
often heard from intelligence consumers around the world trying to
understand Sigint, in 1976 the Dutch Prime Minister complained that the
Sigint that he was receiving was raw, unfinished materials that were
sometimes unbalanced or fragmentary.102
    Sigint Does Not Provide All the Answers. Generally, Sigint cannot
measure a nation’s political will or morale, or detail the innermost workings
of foreign governments. Even Ultra and Magic during World War II failed
to yield this kind of information, but it should be pointed out that the much
vaunted Humint effort during the war did not either. Current and former
senior intelligence officials in the US, Canada and Europe interviewed by
the authors have all emphasised that Sigint is only useful when it is
combined with intelligence obtained from other sources into an ‘all-source’
product.103
    Lack of Timeliness: Although Sigint insiders pride themselves on being
fast, sometimes they are not fast enough because of the time and effort
required to process, analyse and report to consumers the results of Sigint
collection.104 For example, an intelligence community post-mortem of 1968
Czechoslovakian Crisis found that Sigint did not find its way to consumers
in Washington until days after it had been intercepted. A small consolation
for NSA was the fact that the CIA’s Humint and Imint reporting was much
slower.105
    Too Much Information: Experience during the Cold War showed that
NSA often did drown intelligence analysts in a sea of paper, such as during
the 1968 Czech crisis and before the 1973 Middle East War. After the 1973
Mid-East War, the CIA blamed NSA in part for the failure to predict the
war, claiming that CIA intelligence analysts were swamped by hundreds of
Comint summaries every week pertaining to Egyptian and Syrian military
activities. A post-mortem study done after the war concluded, however, that
the overworked CIA and DIA intelligence analysts responsible for the
Middle East were not trained to understand or effectively evaluate the
information contained in the NSA Comint summaries.106
    When Sigint satellites were placed in orbit, the vast amount of
information that they generated swamped the available analytic resources.
For instance, the intercept tapes generated by the US Navy’s first Grab Elint
satellite, which was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida on 22 June
1960, so thoroughly saturated NSA’s analysts that it took months to process
a few weeks of intercepts.107
    Smaller nations, such as India, are also suffering from an information
glut from their Sigint collection operations. A former Indian Cabinet official
recently wrote that ‘We are in the throes of a similar crisis in our technical
collection capability as we are also not able to utilise a major portion of
intercepted traffic.’108
18      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Lack of Sigint: In some instances during the Cold War, good operational
and communications security by the Soviet Union and its allies ‘blacked
out’ Sigint, although these instances were fewer than previously believed.
For example, in 1959 the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN), which
was fighting for the independence of Algeria from France, changed all of its
codes, making them impossible for the French Comint service to decrypt.109
    Deniability : Access to Sigint data can be denied by the use of encryption
and other secure forms of communications, such as landline telephone and
telegraph circuits, or more recently fibre-optic cables.110 For example, NSA
lost much of its access to high-level Soviet communications traffic in the
late 1940s and early 1950s when the Russian military shifted much of its
high-level communications traffic to landlines.111 Recently introduced
complex communications technologies, such as frequency hopping radio
systems, have made the job of the Sigint intercept operator far more difficult
then in the past.112 In recent years, Pakistani-backed guerrillas operating in
the Indian state of Kashmir, calling themselves the Hizbul Mujahideen,
have begun using frequency-hopping radios, burst transmission technology,
citizen-band radios, satellite telephones, even sophisticated encryption
technology, which has made it increasingly difficult for the Indian
government’s Sigint services to monitor their communications traffic.113
    Fragility of the Source: Because it is dependent on extremely fragile and
sensitive sources and methods, Sigint is particularly vulnerable to damage
caused by treason, defections, news leaks, or poorly considered public
statements by government officials.114 A KGB operative named William
Wolfe Weisband, who worked inside the US Army Sigint organisation, the
Army Security Agency (ASA), during the late 1940s single handedly
destroyed three years of successful work against Soviet cipher systems.
After Weisband told the KGB about ASA’s successes against Soviet
systems, on 29 October 1948, known within NSA as ‘Black Friday’, the
Russians executed a massive change of all of their cryptographic systems
and communications operating procedures, shifting all of their mainline
systems to unbreakable one-time pads. It would take six years before NSA
could solve another high-level Soviet cipher system.115
    The June 1960 defection of two NSA civilian employees, William H.
Martin and Bernon F. Mitchell, caused immense damage to NSA’s Sigint
effort against the Soviet Union. According to one source, Martin and
Mitchell’s defection resulted in a ‘partial dimout of United States
communications intelligence’, requiring that NSA work in double shifts for
months trying to fix the damage done to the US Sigint effort.116
    In 1969, President Richard M. Nixon revealed at a press conference that
the US had the ability to read Soviet and North Korean communications.
After making this statement, the Soviets, Chinese and North Koreans
INTRODUCTION                                                               19
changed many of their cryptographic systems. It took NSA months to repair
the damage caused by Nixon’s off-the-cuff remarks.117
    In the 1970s, the East German Secret Service, the STASI, was able to
infiltrate the French listening post in West Berlin. This led the East Germans
to change their communications procedures and manipulate their radio
traffic so as to deceive the French.118
    In 1989, the transcript of an intercepted telephone conversation
involving Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar was leaked to Bogotá
newspapers, which revealed to the members of the Medellin Cartel that the
US was eavesdropping on their telephone calls.119
    Communications Deception: Sigint is vulnerable to communications
deception, although this is a very difficult and dangerous game to play.120
For example, the KGB decided not to play communications deception
games with the Berlin Tunnel in order to protect their source inside MI6,
George Blake.
    Because of it is often compartmentalised away from all other
intelligence sources, Sigint is particularly vulnerable to political
manipulation by those senior government officials who control access to the
intelligence reports. Henry Kissinger, President Richard Nixon’s National
Security Advisor, reportedly ordered that certain sensitive NSA intercepts
not be shared with the Secretaries of State and Defense.121 In 1986, NSA
refused a request by Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger for access to
NSA intercepts concerning the Iran-Contra affair, stating that the Pentagon
had no ‘need-to-know’. What Weinberger and Secretary of State Schultz did
not know was that on orders from the White House, the State and Defense
Departments had been specifically barred from access to these intercepts.
Senior Pentagon officials were later outraged to learn that while they were
not allowed to see the intercepts, NSA was providing copies of these reports
to Richard Secord, who although a retired Air Force General, was not a
government official and held no security clearance.122
    Lack of a Co-ordinated Sigint Effort: Competing bureaucracies were the
bane of the American and Soviet Sigint efforts during the Cold War,
resulting in massive duplication of effort and wasted resources. Declassified
documents clearly demonstrate that during the 1940s and 1950s, the
intelligence components of the three US military services pursued
independent intelligence collection and processing efforts that were
‘conducted with a minimum of service co-ordination’.123 For instance, by
1951 senior CIA officials had become so frustrated by the continuing
internecine fighting between the three American military Comint
organisations in the Far East, as well as the inability of NSA’s predecessor
organisation, the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA), to impose order
over its quarrelling subordinates, that the CIA came to view AFSA as
20      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

unresponsive to civilian authority or national intelligence requirements. By
mid-1951 CIA Director General Walter Bedell Smith was so unhappy with
how the American Comint system was working that he threatened to stand
on his right as the head of the US intelligence community and reorganise the
entire American Comint system unless the State and Defense Departments
stepped in and did something to fix the problems.124
    During the manhunt for Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar in 1992–93,
US Army and CIA airborne Sigint units operated independently of each
other in order to prove that their personnel, equipment and equipment were
superior to their counterparts. US Army intelligence officers believed that
the CIA station chief in Bogotá was taking credit for information that they
had collected.125
    In the Soviet Union there was also little cooperation or coordination of
effort between the Sigint units of the KGB and the intelligence organisation
of the Soviet military, the GRU, throughout the Cold War.126
    But the superpowers were not the only ones who suffered from this
afflication. During the Cold War the West Germans fielded five Sigint
organisations, four military and one civilian unit run by the West German
foreign intelligence services, the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND) For
almost 20 years, from 1970 until the end of Cold War in 1989, the West
German military services and the BND fought a series of bitter internecine
battles over mission and resource allocation, as well as control of the West
German government’s Sigint effort.127
    During the 1950s there was no coordination of effort among the Dutch
army, navy and air force Sigint units, resulting in tremendous duplication of
effort. The Dutch Army Sigint unit, for example, did not even bother to tell
the Dutch naval Sigint organisation, the TIVC, which targets it was copying
or what results it was obtaining. A proposed merger of the three service
Sigint organisations collapsed because each of the services feared that their
requirements would not be met in a unified Sigint organisation. A former
Dutch Sigint official later admitted that Sigint cooperation with foreign
services was better than between the three Dutch Sigint organisations.128
    Technical Issues: Sigint’s ability to perform effectively is subject to the
vagaries of atmospheric conditions and solar flare activities. For example,
in the mid-1950s, the Canadian intercept site at Churchill in Manitoba was
forced to shut down its operations for days at a time because atmospheric
anomalies, which are common in the northern climes, prevented the
station’s operators from hearing any high-frequency signals.129 Terrain is
also a significant limiting factor. For example, Sigint intercept operators
have historically experienced great difficulty copying radio signals
emanating from urban areas, densely wooded terrain or in mountainous
regions.130
INTRODUCTION                                                                          21
    Finally, radio interference coming from major urban areas or industrial
activities in the vicinity of the listening post can wreak havoc with radio
intercept operations.131 For example, the Canadian listening post at Inuvik in
northern Canada had to be closed in April 1970 because radio interference
from nearby oil exploration activity significantly affected the station’s
ability to monitor HF radio signals coming from the Soviet Union.132

                                        NOTES

  1. Christopher Andrew, ‘Conclusion: An Agenda for Future Research’, Intelligence and
     National Security 12/1 (Jan. 1997) p.228.
  2. A more detailed discussion of these matters is contained in Matthew M. Aid, ‘Not So
     Anonymous: Parting the Veil of Secrecy About the National Security Agency’, in Athan G.
     Theoharis (ed.) A Culture of Secrecy: The Government Versus the People’s Right to Know
     (Lawrence: UP of Kansas 1998) pp.65–7.
  3. William Rosenau, ‘A Deafening Silence: US Policy and the Sigint Facility at Lourdes’,
     Intelligence and National Security 9/A (Oct. 1994) pp.730–1.
  4. John le Carré, Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy [1974] (NY: Coronet Books 1994) p.206.
  5. Maj. Gen. Yashwant Deva (Ret.), ‘Of Tapes and Tapping: Technical Intelligence Scores
     Over Human Intelligence’, 2 July 1999, located at http://www.ipcs.org/issues/articles/
     217-ip-deva.htm.
  6. Department of the Army, Field Manual FM 34–2, Collection Management, Oct. 1990,
     pp.2–5.
  7. US Marine Corps, Marine Corps Warfighting Publication (MCWP) 2–15.2, Signals
     Intelligence, June 1999, p. 1–1.
  8. US House of Representatives, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Annual Report
     by the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 95th Congress, 2nd Session, 1978,
     p.50.
  9. US Senate, Report No. 94–755, Final Report of the Select Committee to Study
     Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, 94th Congress, 2nd
     Session, 1976, Book III, p.737; US House of Representatives, Permanent Select
     Committee on Intelligence, Report No. 95–1795, Annual Report by the Permanent Select
     Committee on Intelligence, 1978, pp.31, 58; Department of Defense Directive S-5100-20,
     The National Security Agency and the Central Security Service, 23 Dec. 1971, p.2, DoD
     FOIA; Air University Extension Career Institute, Electronic Signals Intelligence
     Exploitation Craftsman Career development Course AFSC IN571 (Goodfellow AFB, 17th
     Training Wing, 21 March 1995) Vol.11, pp.34–5, USAF FOIA; Naval Cryptology in
     National Security, 1985, p.30, COMNAVSECGRU FOIA; David L. Christianson, ‘signals
     Intelligence’, in Gerald W. Hopple and Bruce W. Watson (eds.) The Military Intelligence
     Community (Boulder, CO: Westview Press 1986) p.41.
 10. Patrick J. McGarvey, CIA: The Myth and the Madness (NY: Saturday Review Press 1972)
     pp.42–3.
 11. Ibid., pp.74–6.
 12. Headquarters Strategic Air Command History Division, SAC Reconnaissance History:
     January 1968 – June 1971, 7 Nov. 1973, p.72, via Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson.
 13. Air University Extension Career Institute, Electronic Signals Intelligence Exploitation
     Craftsman Career development Course AFSC 1N571 (Goodfellow AFB, 17th Training
     Wing, 21 March 1995) p.19, USAF FOIA.
 14. Headquarters Strategic Air Command, History Division, SAC Reconnaissance History
     (note 12) p.3, via Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson.
 15. US House of Representatives, House Intelligence Committee 1978 Annual Report, p.36; NSGTP
     69304-B, Naval Cryptology in National Security (note 9) pp.30–1, COMNAVSECGRU FOIA;
     NSGTP 68322, Cryptologic Operators Manual for Noncommunications Operations, 1980,
22      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     pp.6–12, 40–4, COMNAVSECGRU FOIA; FM 34–2, Collection Management, Oct. 1990,
     pp.2–5; Charles A. Kroger Jr, ‘ELINT: A Scientific Intelligence System’, Studies in
     Intelligence (Winter 1958) p.72, RG-263, Entry 37, Box 1, Folder 6, US National Archives,
     College Park, Maryland (hereafter ‘NA, CP’); Memo with attachment, Radford to Secretary
     of Defense, 20 July 1954, RG-330, Entry 200B OSD 1954, Box 47, 334 Joint Electronics
     Analysis Group, NA, CP.
16. FISINT was formerly known as Telemetry Intelligence (Telint). Christianson, ‘signals
     Intelligence’ (note 9) p.40; Naval Cryptology in National Security (note 9) p.48.
17. National Air Intelligence Center, Draft, Technical Requirements Document (TRD) for the
     Sigint System Integration Contract, 24 July 2000, located at www.pixs.wpafb.af.mil/
     pixslibr/DATAEX/sigsoo_drftl.doc.
18. ‘Paper Looks at Continuing Value of Russian Tracking Station Near Havana’, BBC
     Monitoring, 18 Dec. 2000.
19. SRH-264, A Lecture on Communications Intelligence by Captain J.N. Wenger, USN, 14
     Aug. 1946, p.8, RG-457, NA, CP.
20. US Marine Corps, MCWP 2-15.2, Signals Intelligence, June 1999, pp.1–4 – 1-5.
21. NCVA Cryptolog, Summer 1996, p.3.
22. Confidential interviews.
23. Evan Thomas, The Very Best Men (NY: Simon & Schuster 1995) pp.52–3, 360.
24. John Kenneth Knaus, Orphans of the Cold War: America and the Tibetan Struggle for
     Survival (NY: BBS Public Affairs 1999) p.233; William M. Leary, ‘secret Mission to
     Tibet’, Air & Space, Jan. 1998, pp.62, 70.
25. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States 1964–1968: Vol XXX, China
     (Washington DC: GPO 1998) pp.476–7, 495.
26. ‘ROK Spies Who Died After Infiltrating NK Number 7,726’, Korea Times, 27 July 1999.
27. Stansfield Turner, ‘Intelligence for a New World Order’, Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, p.158.
28. Confidential interview.
29. Transcript, National Public Radio, Morning Edition, National Security Agency, 14–16
     March 2000.
30. Bob Drogin, ‘At CIA School, Data Outweigh Derring-do’, Los Angeles Times, 27 Aug.
     2000, p.A7.
31. John M. Maury, Memorandum for the Record: Conversations With Messrs. Ed Proctor and
    Jack Smith Re Use of CHICKADEE Material for NIE 11-8-61, 7 June 1961, CIA FOIA
     Page at www/odci.gov/. Another former CIA official stated that Penkovskiy gave ‘little
     information of major importance that had any significant effect on our intelligence
     estimates. He was primarily useful in... confirming data from other sources, and adding
     confidence to existing assessments’, for which see Herbert Scoville Jr, ‘Is Espionage
    Necessary For Our Security’, Foreign Affairs, April 1976, p.488.
32. Intelligence Community Experiment in Competitive Analysis: Soviet Strategic Objectives:
    An Alternative View: Report of Team‘B’,Dec. 1976, p.9, RG-263, NA, CP.
33. David Kahn, The Codebreakers (NY: Macmillan 1967) p.727.
34. Christopher Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside Story (NY: HarperCollins
     1990) p.455; Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin, The Sword and the Shield: The
    Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB (NY: Basic Books 1999) pp.352–3.
35. Mark Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (London: Faber 1996) p.8.
36. Aldrich contribution.
37. Wiebes contribution, p.254.
38. Harry Rowe Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP 1970)
    p. 127.
39. ‘Address at the CIRA Luncheon, 5 Oct. 1998; John Millis’ Speech’, CIRA Newsletter,
    Winter 1998/1999, p.6.
40. Ibid.
41. David Kahn, ‘Big Ear or Big Brother?’, New York Times Magazine, 16 May 1976, p.62.
42. US Marine Corps, MCWP 2-15.2, Signals Intelligence, June 1999, p. 1-5; Penelope S.
    Horgan, Signals Intelligence Support to US Military Commanders: Past and Present
     (Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College 1991) p.88.
INTRODUCTION                                                                           23
43. DOD Directive S-5100.19, Implementation of National Security Council Intelligence
    Directive No. 7, 19 March 1958, pp.l–4, DOD FOIA; JCS 2010/143, Fulfillment of
    Proposed NSCID No. 7 and COMINT Communications Requirements, 18 July 1958, RG-
     218, CCS 334 NSA, Section 22, NA, CP; NSA/CSS Manual No. 22-1, National Security
    Agency Central Security Service Organization Manual, 21 Jan. 1974, p.2, NSA FOIA;
     McGarvey, CIA (note 10) pp.45–6; Central Intelligence Agency, A Consumer’s Guide to
    Intelligence, Sept. 1993, pp.5, 38; NWP-5, Naval Cryptologic Operations, p.3-2, ONI
     FOIA; NSGI C3211.1D, CRITIC (Critical) Information, 2 Aug. 1990, COMNAVSECGRU
     FOIA; ESCR 200-40, The CRITIC Test and Evaluation Program, 12 May 1987, AIA
     FOIA; Tad Szulc, ‘The NSA-America’s $10 Billion Frankenstein’, Penthouse, Nov. 1975;
     ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.43.
44. Paul Bracken, The Command and Control of Nuclear Forces (New Haven, CT: Yale UP
     1983) p.26; Bruce D. Berkowitz and Allan E. Goodman, Strategic Intelligence for
    American National Security (Princeton UP 1989) p.35.
45. CIA: The Pike Report (London: Spokesman Books 1977) p.140; Roy Godson (ed.)
    Intelligence Requirements for the 1980s: Clandestine Collection (Washington DC:
     National Strategy Information Center 1982) p.119.
46. Report to the President’as Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board on Intelligence Community
    Activities Relating to the Cuban Arms Build-Up: 14 April through 14 October 1962,
     undated, p.24, National Security Files: Countries: Cuba, Box 61, Kennedy Library, Boston,
     Massachussetts.
47. Lester W. Grau, Road Warriors of the Hindu Kush: The Battle for the Lines of
     Communication in the Soviet-Afghan War (Ft Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies
     Office, Aug. 1996) located at http://call.army.mil/call/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/roadwar/road
     war.htm.
48. Annual Historical Report US Army Security Agency FY 1964, p.72, INSCOM FOIA and
     Confidential interviews.
49. Vladislav M. Zubok, ‘Spy vs. Spy: The KGB vs. the CIA, 1960-1962’, Cold War
     International History Project Bulletin, No. 4, Fall 1994, pp.22–33.
50. Raymond Garthoff and Amy Knight, ‘New Evidence on Soviet Intelligence: The KGB’s
     1967 Annual Report’, Cold War International History Project Bulletin, No. 10, March
     1998, p.214.
51. Department of the Army, DA Field Manual 34-40-12, Morse Code Intercept Operations,
     26 Aug. 1991, p.2-4, INSCOM FOIA; US Marine Corps, MCWP 2-15.2, Signals
     Intelligence, June 1999, p.1-5; SSgt Regina Mason, ‘Flight Commanders: Moral and
     Mission Are Key Responsibilities’, Spokesman, Jan. 1991, p.9.
52. US House of Representatives, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Report
     105–508, Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999, 105th Congress, 2nd
     Session, 5 May 1998, p.10.
53. See the case studies detailed in USAFSS Historical Office, A Special Historical Study of
     USAFSS Response to World Crises, 1949–1969, 22 April 1970, AIA FOIA.
54. Angello Codevilla, Informing Statecraft: Intelligence for a New Century (NY: The Free
     Press 1992) pp. 14–15.
55. David Kahn, ‘Cryptology’, The Encyclopedia Americana, 1987, Vol.8, p.276.
56. David A. Fulghum, ‘Sigint Aircraft May Face Obsolescence in Five Years’, Aviation Week
     & Space Technology, 21 Oct. 1996, p.54.
57. A discussion of this contentious issue can be found in Godson, Intelligence Requirements
    for the 1980s (note 45) p.119.
58. ‘Address at the CIRA Luncheon, 5 October 1998; John Millis’ Speechs’, CIRA Newsletter,
     Winter 1998/1999, p.6.
59. Rosenau, ‘A Deafening Silence’ (note 3) p.726.
60. Confidential information.
61. US Defense Intelligence Agency Testimony to US Senate Select Committee on
     Intelligence, ‘Worldwide Threat to US National Security’, Aug. 1996, located at www.
     securitymanagement.com/library/000255.html.
24      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

62. Peter Conradi, ‘Stasi Phone Taps Sound Alarm in Kohl’s Inner Circle’, Sunday Times, 9
     April 2000, p.26; Roger Boyes, ‘Stasi’s Spies Bugged 100 Kohl Phone Lines’, London
     Sunday Times, 29 June 2000. On the East German Sigint service in general, see Ben B.
     Fischer, ‘One of the Biggest Ears in the World: East German Sigint’, International journal
     of Intelligence and Counterintelligence 12/2 (Summer 1998) pp. 142–53.
63. Gene Poteat, ‘Stealth, Countermeasures, and ELINT, 1960–1975’, Studies in Intelligence,
     42/1 (1998) p.52, CIA FOIA.
64. Mark Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (London: Faber 1996) p.5.
65. Press Release, ‘GCHQ Accomodation Project Site Announced’, 7 May 1999, located at
     www.fco.gov.uk/news/newstext.asp72391.
66. CM 4897, Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 1999–2000, 2 Nov. 2000,
     www.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm48/4897/4897-02.htm.
67. Rudner contribution, p.103.
68. Stuart Farson, ‘Accountable and Prepared? Reorganizing Canada’s Intelligence
     Community for the 21st Century’, Canadian Foreign Policy 1/3 (Fall 1993) p.49.
69. Alexander Zervoudakis, ‘Nihil Mirare, Nihil Contemptare, Omni Intelligere: Franco-
     Vietnamese Intelligence in Indochina, 1950–1954’, Intelligence and National Security 13/1
     (Spring 1998) pp.203–25.
70. Wiebes contribution, p.243.
71. Horgan, Signals Intelligence Support to US Military Commanders (note 42) p.84.
72. Memo, Col. T.F. Van Natta, Assistant Chief of Staff, G2, Eighth US Army to Assistant
     Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of the Army, Clearance for Access to Communications
     Intelligence, 24 Oct. 1952, RG-338 Records of GHQ Far East Command, Entry 34015A
     AC of S, G-2 Executive (Coordination) Division, Box 70, File: 333.5, NA, CP.
73. Oliver Kirby, ‘Louis Tordella Led by Example’, Cryptolog, Spring 1996, p. 8.
74. Agenda Prepared by Army Field Forces Observer Team No. 5, August 1951, p. 167, MISC
     333 AFF-FECOM, OCMH, Washington DC; Memo for the NSA/CSS Representative
     Defense, NSA Transition Book for the Department of Defense, 9 Dec. 1992, p.2. The author
     is grateful to Dr. Jeffrey T. Richelson for making a copy of this document available. Ed
     Evanhoe, Dark Moon: Eighth Army Special Operations in the Korean War (Annapolis MD:
     Naval Institute Press 1995) pp.86–7; Private information.
75. Eduard Mark, Aerial Interdiction in Three Wars (Washington DC: Center for Air Force
     History 1994) p.277.
76. US Naval Security Group, US Naval Communications Supplementary Activities in the
     Korean War: June 1950–August 1953, p.80, COMNAVSECGRU FOIA; Confidential
     interview.
77. Marshall L. Michel III, Clashes: Air Combat Over North Vietnam, 1965–1972 (Annapolis,
     MD: Naval Institute Press 1997) pp. 114–15.
78. ‘Good Times With Bad-Eye: The Adventures of John ‘Bad-Eye’ Martin, undated, located
     at www.vietvet.org/badeye.htm.
79. Joan Edwards, ‘Reagan’s Charges “Total Untruths”, ex-CIA Man Says’, Toronto Globe and
    Mail, 29 June 1984, p.12.
80. Victor Sheymov, Tower of Secrets (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press 199?) p.15.
81. Aldrich contribution, p.88.
82. Marian Wilkinson, ‘Our Spies Knew Balibo Five at Risk’, Sydney Morning Herald, 13 July
     2000, located at www.smh.com.au/news/0007/13/pageone/pageonel3.html
83. Horgan (note 42) p.85.
84. See for example Memo, Tarkenton to Assistant Chief of Staff, G2, I Corps et al., Classified
    Information for Limited Use, 30 Dec. 1950, RG-500 Records of Eighth US Army
     1946–1956, AcofS, G-2, Box 53, File: Classified Information for Limited Use, NA, CP.
85. The NSA COMINT report language is taken from NSA, 3/0/__/R26-63, COMINT Report,
     23 Nov. 1963 2103Z, JFK Assassination Files.
86. Memo, Belmont to Boardman, 1 Feb. 1956, pp. 1, 9, FBI Venona Files; SRH-123, Brownell
     Committee Report, pp.103–4, 108, RG-457, NA, CP; Dr Ray S. Cline, The CIA Under
    Reagan, Bush and Casey (Washington DC: Acropolis Books 1981) p.130; Woodrow J.
     Kuhns (ed.) Assessing the Soviet Threat: The Early Cold War Years (Washington DC:
INTRODUCTION                                                                             25
      Center for the Study of Intelligence: 1997) p.5; Russell Jack Smith, The Unknown CIA: My
      Three Decades with the Agency (NY: Berkley Books 1989) p.42; RADM Tom Brooks,
      ‘The Yl Story: Continued’, Naval Intelligence Professionals Quarterly (Winter 1999) p.3.
 87. Horgan (note 42) p.86.
 88. ‘COMINT and the PRC Intervention in the Korean War’, Cryptologic Quarterly, date
      unknown, p.7, NSA FOIA.
 89. Faligot contribution, p.9.
 90. Phillip Knightley, The Second Oldest Profession (NY: Norton 1986) p.376.
 91. Godson (note 45) p.118.
 92. NIE 11-3/8-76, Soviet Forces for Intercontinental Conflict Through the Mid-1980s, 1976,
      p.59. RG-263, NA, CP.
 93. Robert M. Gates, From the Shadows (NY: Simon & Schuster 1996) pp.270–3; Confidential
      interview.
 94. Gates, From the Shadows (note 93) p.272; Jeffrey T. Richelson, A Century of Spies (NY:
      Oxford University Press 1995) p.386; Christopher Andrew, For the President’s Eyes Only
      (NY: HarperCollins 1995) p.475.
 95. Raj Chengappa and Zahid Hussain, ‘Bang for Bang’, India Today, 8 June 1998, www.india-
      today.com/itoday/08061998/cover.html.
 96. Percy Kemp, ‘The Fall and Rise of France’s Spymasters’, Intelligence and National
      Security 9/1 (Jan. 1994) p.20.
 97. Tony Geraghty, BRIXMIS (London: HarperCollins 1997) p.284.
 98. ‘COMINT and the PRC Intervention in the Korean War’, Cryptologic Quarterly, date
      unknown, p.10, NSA FOIA.
 99. Captain James D. Pearson, ‘On Going Tactical’, The Hallmark, June 1976, p.2.
100. Memo, Ladd to Director, 28 Feb. 1951, p.1, FBI Venona Files.
101. Bob Drogin, ‘Crash Jolts US e-Spy Agency’, Los Angeles Times, 21 March 2000, p.l.
102. Wiebes contribution, p.274.
103. Horgan (note 42) pp.86–7.
104. Ibid. p.85.
105. CIA: The Pike Report (London: Spokesman Books 1977) p.140.
106. US House of Representatives, Select Committee on Intelligence, US Intelligence Agencies
      and Activities: The Performance of the Intelligence Community, 94th Congress, 1st
      Session, 1975, Part 2, pp.658–9, 680–1; The Pike Report (note 105) pp.143, 147.
107. Naval Research Laboratory, NRL Press Release 32-00r, ‘A Tribute to the Father of US
      Electronic Warfare: Howard Otto Lorenzen’, 22 May 2000, located at www.pao.nrl.navy.
      mil/rel-00/32-00r.html.
108. ‘Intelligible Intelligence: An Alchemy of Collation and Coordination’, The Times of India,
      21 Sept. 2000.
109. Faligot contribution, p.188.
110. Horgan (note 42) p.87.
111. DA Pamphlet No. 30-2, The Soviet Army, July 1949, p.41, RG-6, Box 107, MacArthur
      Memorial Library (MACL); SRH-123, Brownell Committee Report, p.29, RG-457, NA,
      CP; SRH-277, A Lecture on Communications Intelligence by Rear Admiral E.E. Stone,
      DIRAFSA, 5 June 1951, p.34, RG-457, NA, CP; S/ARU/C735, Developments in Soviet
      Cypher [sic] and Signals Security, 1946–1948, Dec. 1948, RG-38, Translations of
      Intercepted Enemy Radio Traffic, 1940–1946, Box 2739, NA, CP; David E. Murphy,
      Sergei A. Kondrashev and George Bailey, Battleground Berlin (New Haven, CT: Yale UP
      1997) p.208.
112. US Marine Corps, MCWP 2-15.2, Signals Intelligence, June 1999, p.1-5.
113. Ramesh Vinayak, ‘Wireless Wars’, India Today, 14 Sept. 1998, www.india-today.com/
      itoday/14091998/war.html.
114. Vice Admiral B.R. Inman, ‘The NSA Perspective on Telecommunications Protection in the
      Nongovernmental Sector’, Cryptologic Spectrum (Summer 1979) p.5.
115. National Cryptologic School, On Watch (Ft Meade, MD: NSA/CSS, Sept. 1986) pp.19–20,
      NSA FOIA; TI Item #137, NT-1 Traffic Intelligence, Unprecedented Coordinated Russian
      Communications Changes, 4 Nov. 1948, RG-38, Box 2742, NA, CP.
26       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

116. US House of Representatives, Committee on Un-American Activities, Security Practices
     in the National Security Agency, 88th Congress, 2nd Session, 1962, pp.7–9; Harry Howe
     Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP 1970) p.129;
     Richard J. Aldrich, Espionage, Security and Intelligence in Britain: 1945–1970
     (Manchester UP 1998) pp.57–8; Christopher Andrew, The Sword and the Shield (NY: Basic
     Books 1999) p.179; Confidential interview.
117. Seymour M. Hersh, The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House (NY: Summit
     Books 1983) pp.73–4.
118. Faligot contribution, pp. 194–5.
119. Mark Bowden, ‘Killing Pablo: Martinez Pushes Ahead with the Hunt’, Philadelphia
     Inquirer, 3 Dec. 2000, located at www.killingpablo.com/content/killingpablo/philly/1047
     343243.htm.
120. For one unsubstantiated allegation of Soviet communications deception, see Edward Jay
     Epstein, Deception: The Invisible War Between the KGB and the CIA (NY: Simon &
     Schuster 1989) pp. 162–76.
121. Hersh, The Price of Power (note 117) p.207.
122. These NSA intercepts were highly classified and given very limited distribution, with
     copies going only to National Security Advisor Robert McFarlane, Lt. Col. Oliver North,
     CIA Director William Casey, and Vice Admiral Arthur S. Moreau Jr, assistant to the
     Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Lawrence E. Walsh, Iran-Contra: The Final Report
     (NY: Times Books 1994) pp.3, 207; Stephen Engelberg, ‘3 Agencies Said to Have
     Received Data About Iran Money Transfers’, New York Times, 27 Nov. 1986, p.A1.
123. Mats R. Berdal, The United States, Norway and the Cold War 1954–60 (London:
     Macmillan Press 1997) p.29.
124. Memo, Director of Central Intelligence to Executive Secretary, National Security Council,
     Potential Soviet Attack on Our Essential Communications Systems and Organizations, 25
     Jan. 1951, RG-59, State Department Participation in the National Security Council, Box
      124, File: NSC – Miscellaneous, 1950–1952, NA, CP; Jack E. Ingram, ‘The Origins of
     NSA’, American Intelligence Journal, Spring/Summer 1994, p.40; Christopher Andrew,
     For The President’s Eyes Only (NY: HarperCollins 1995) p.196.
125. Mark Bowden, ‘A Rivalry Grows Between Spy Units’, Philadelphia Inquirer, 27 Nov.
      2000, located at www.killingpablo.com/content/killingpablo/philly/1047343226.htm.
126. Confidential interview.
127. Schmidt-Eenboom contribution, p.145 and passim.
128. Wiebes contribution, passim.
129. N.C. Gerson, ‘Collaboration in Sigint; Canada – U.S.’, NCVA Cryptolog, Spring 1999, p.2.
130. US Marine Corps, MCWP 2-15.2, Signals Intelligence, June 1999, p.1-5.
131. DoD Directive C-3222.5, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) Management Program for
      Sigint Sites, 22 April 1987, DOD FOIA.
132. Gerson, ‘Collaboration in Sigint’ (note 129) p.2.
                                      2

             The National Security Agency
                  and the Cold War

                        MATTHEW M. AID




Since its formation in November 1952, the National Security Agency
(NSA) has managed and directed all US government Signals Intelligence
(Sigint) collection and processing activities. Today, NSA is the largest and
arguably the most powerful intelligence organization in the world. It is the
sole collector and processor of Communications Intelligence (Comint), the
primary processor of Foreign Instrumentation Signals Intelligence (Fisint),
and the coordinator of the US government’s national Electronics
Intelligence (Elint) program since 1958. Per its charter, NSA does not
produce finished intelligence reports. This is the responsibility of NSA’s
consumers within the US intelligence community. Since its inception, NSA
has also been responsible for overseeing the security of the US
government’s communications and data processing systems (referred to
within NSA as Information Security or Infosec), and since the mid-1980s
NSA has also managed the US government’s Operations Security (Opsec)
program.1
    NSA’s principal consumers are: the White House, the National Security
Council, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of
the Treasury, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Commerce, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency
(DIA), the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the three service intelligence agencies, all
unified and specified military commands, military operational commanders
(as required), and the intelligence agencies of collaborating foreign nations.2
    Although it is currently impossible because of secrecy constraints to
empirically demonstrate how important NSA’s role was during the Cold
War, comments by former senior American intelligence officials suggest
that the value of the Agency’s Sigint product was great. For example,
former NSA Director Vice Admiral Bobby Ray Inman stated in 1979 that
‘In the signals intelligence field, [NSA] has, since its inception in 1952,
28      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

provided a vast quantity of intelligence information of inestimable value in
the conduct of the Nation’s defense and foreign policy.’3
    The secrecy that historically has cloaked the subject of post-World War
II Sigint is the hardest obstacle for the historian to overcome. In 1995, the
Canadian historian John Ferris wrote ‘We know very little about American
signals intelligence. Because its product was not circulated widely or
referred to explicitly in intelligence summaries, its significance will be
unusually hard to trace.’ Nonetheless, Ferris added, ‘The government may
well be able to keep most of the evidence from the public record if it wishes
to do so.’4
    But American intelligence officials have long known that it was
inevitable that this curtain of secrecy would eventually have to come down.
In a 1946 Top Secret memorandum, one of the founding fathers of NSA, Dr
Solomon Kullback, wrote ‘It is obvious that we cannot hope to keep the
cryptologic achievements of the United States and Great Britain completely
secret for an indefinite or large number of years.’5
    The late Dr Kullback was, of course, correct. As will be detailed below,
interviews with former NSA officials and newly released documents reveal
for the first time that by the time the Cold War came to an abrupt end with
the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, Sigint had achieved a preeminent status
within the American intelligence community, supplanting (if not actually
submerging) the more traditional manpower intensive intelligence sources,
such as spies, agents, defectors, diplomats, and low-level military Human
Intelligence (Humint) sources, which former NSA director Vice Admiral
William O. Studeman obliquely referred to as ‘historically less productive
intelligence means’.6
    The reason for Sigint’s rise to the top of the American intelligence ‘food
chain’ was simple. Because during the 45 years of the Cold War in Europe,
as will be detailed below, Sigint consistently produced where other
intelligence sources failed. In fact, it can be argued that Sigint was not only
the most important source of intelligence – it was practically the only
reliable intelligence source for the United States and its Western European
allies about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain. NSA
accomplishments, most of which remain classified and buried in NSA’s
storage vaults, were arguably the most impressive of any American
intelligence organization during the Cold War. Former NSA director, Vice
Admiral J.M. ‘Mike’ McConnell, has recently compared NSA’s Cold War
accomplishments with those achieved during World War II, writing that
NSA’s ‘Sigint successes during the Cold War were no less significant in
terms of gravity and magnitude for changing world history and for
protecting the interests of the United States, our allies, and democracy.’7
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                  29
THE SOVIET TARGET

This contribution focuses on NSA’s work against its main target during the
Cold War, the Soviet Union. But it is important to note that the Soviet Union
was not NSA’s sole target. For example, as of 1949 American and British
codebreakers were reading the diplomatic traffic of 52 countries, and were
probably reading the communications traffic of at least ten other nations.8
    But the Soviet Union was by far NSA’s largest and most important target
during the 45 years of the Cold War in Europe, and as such, the vast
majority of NSA’s collection resources were devoted to monitoring the
Soviet Union and its allies in Eastern Europe. As of June 1949, 71 per cent
of all American Comint intercept personnel and 60 per cent of all American
Comint processing personnel were working on the ‘Soviet Problem’, and
yet the US was only able to intercept and process a very small portion of the
Soviet radio traffic then coursing through the airwaves.9 This level of effort
against the Soviet Union remained relatively constant throughout the Cold
War. During the 1970s, NSA’s Sigint collection resources dedicated to
monitoring the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe closely matched the rest of
the US intelligence community. As of 1975, the US intelligence
community’s target coverage was as follows: the USSR and Eastern Europe:
65 per cent, Asia: 25 per cent, the Middle East: 7 per cent, Latin America:
2 per cent; and the rest of the world: 1 per cent.10 As of 1980, almost 60 per
cent of NSA’s collection resources were still dedicated to covering the
Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies. By 1989, the year that the
Berlin Wall fell, more than 50 per cent of the Agency’s assets were still
devoted to coverage of the Soviets.11
    As one can readily imagine, given its sheer size, trying to spy on the
Soviet Union during the Cold War was a monumental task. The Soviet
Union was the largest country in the world, covering an area of 6.65 million
square miles, which made it almost three times the size of the United States.
It occupied 17 per cent of the world’s land mass, stretching across two
continents and 11 time zones, which came to a distance of about 6,000 miles
running from east to west. Most of the Soviet Union lay north of the 49th
Parallel (i.e. north of Vancouver, Canada). The Soviet Union’s two largest
cities, Moscow and Leningrad, were on the same latitude as Edmonton,
Canada and Anchorage, Alaska respectively.12
    The second major obstacle was that obtaining reliable intelligence
information using traditional human intelligence (Humint) means inside the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was an extremely difficult proposition.
The Soviet Union was hermetically sealed from the outside world, and
paranoia was the norm in Stalin’s Russia. The Russian government strictly
limited travel visas to the Soviet Union to a very small number of foreign
30      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

diplomats and a few reporters and officially approved visitors. Photography
of anything but the most mundane subject inside the Soviet Union was
strictly prohibited. Some 220,000 KGB border guards made it extremely
difficult to sneak in or out of the Soviet Union. Travel inside the Soviet
Union was severely restricted for both Russians and foreigners by an
internal passport system, which coupled with the KGB’s large and
extremely efficient counterintelligence service and a massive network of
informers at all levels of Russian society, meant that operating agent
networks in the country was virtually impossible. Foreigners were followed
by the KGB whenever they ventured onto the streets of Moscow or other
Eastern European cities, their phones were tapped, their mail read, their
apartments and cars were bugged, and those ‘normal’ Russians that they
spoke to were closely questioned by the KGB. Because of the extreme
difficulty of conducting covert Humint operations in this region of the
world, the US intelligence community came to refer to the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe as ‘denied areas’.13
    The historical record, such as it exists today, clearly shows that
throughout the Cold War, the spies of the CIA and its European partners
produced relatively little in the way of hard intelligence about what was
going on inside the Soviet Union.
    For example, conveniently forgotten in the recent historiography
produced by CIA historians is the fact that repeated attempts by the CIA and
its European allies to infiltrate agents into the Soviet Union in the late 1940s
and early 1950s were a complete failure. Between 1950 and 1954, the
Norwegian Intelligence Service infiltrated a small number of agents from
neutral Finland into the strategically important Kola Peninsula in northern
Russia. But these missions yielded little intelligence.14
    Attempts by the CIA, MI6 and the West German Gehlen Organization to
infiltrate agents by air and sea into the Soviet-controlled Baltic states of
Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia between 1946 and 1954 were smashed by the
KGB. Newly available KGB internal historical documents reveal that the
Soviets compromised these operations at a very early stage, luring dozens
of American, British and Swedish agents into the hands of the KGB. More
than 30 of the British agents alone were lost during the operation, and those
operatives who survived were almost all captured and ‘turned’ by the
KGB.15
    Between September 1949 and the end of 1954, the CIA, MI6 and the
Gehlen Organization parachuted some 150 operatives into the Ukraine,
Belorussia and Moldavia to try and establish agent networks that could
provide early warning of a Soviet attack on Western Europe, as well as
support anti-Communist Ukrainian guerrilla forces operating in the region.
None of these operatives ever came back from their mission. Most were
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                    31

killed or disappeared without a trace shortly after landing. KGB documents
confirm that those agents that did survive were captured by the KGB and
‘played back’, feeding the CIA and MI6 with false or misleading
information.16
    CIA attempts to infiltrate agents into the southern Soviet Union from
Turkey during the early 1950s were, according to a former CIA officer,
‘spectacularly unsuccessful’.17 Starting in the early 1950s, Britain’s MI6
parachuted dozens of agents trained on a Turkish island into the Soviet
Caucasus. The operation was terminated in 1956 because of a 100 per cent
loss rate among the agents.18
     The level of frustration felt by CIA and MI6 officers about their inability
to infiltrate the Soviet Union was enormous. A CIA historian has only
recently admitted that during the early postwar years ‘the intelligence
collection arm of the CIA was finding it impossibly difficult to penetrate
Stalin’s paranoid police state with agents’.19 In 1952 a CIA ‘Murder Board’
reviewed the Humint operations in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe,
and concluded that ‘Our operations have failed and there is no alternative to
offer.’20 Peer de Silva, who was a senior official in the CIA’s Soviet Russian
Division until 1955, described the parachute insertion program as ‘wasteful
and, in many ways, tragic’. He added that the operation only produced
 ‘calamitous results’.21 Anthony Cavendish, who ran many of the agent
parachute operations into the Soviet Baltic states for MI6, wrote that ‘The
operations must now seem nothing more than a catalogue of disasters.’22
     There is no question that the CIA’s early Humint efforts against the
Soviet Union were poorly managed and largely ineffectual. A Top Secret
 1955 report to President Dwight D. Eisenhower bluntly stated that ‘we
obtain little significant information from classical covert operations inside
Russia’.23 Dr George Kistiakowsky, President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s
science advisor and a key player in postwar US intelligence, characterized
the American clandestine Humint effort against the Soviet Union in the
postwar years as ‘[P]itiful. The time of Mata Hari had passed.’24
     With no other sources available (photo reconnaissance satellites would
not become available until the early 1960s), out of sheer necessity the US
intelligence community had to rely to a very large degree on Sigint because
at the time, it was the only reliable source producing intelligence
information about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain, particularly
 for intelligence on Soviet military strength and capabilities.25

SIGINT IN THE EARLY COLD WAR YEARS

On the day that Japan surrendered in September 1945, the combined US
Army and Navy Comint organizations, the Signal Security Agency (SSA)
32      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

and the Naval Communications Intelligence Organization (OP-20-G),
consisted of more than 36,000 military and civilian personnel manning 37
strategic listening posts and direction finding stations and dozens of tactical
mobile Comint intercept units that were equipped with more than 2,500
radio intercept receivers, although most of these assets were in the Pacific
where they had been targeted against Japan.26
     The end of World War II led to a restructuring of the Army and Navy
cryptologic organizations. On 15 September 1945, the SSA was redesignated
as the Army Security Agency (ASA), which unlike its predecessor was given
complete control over all US Army Comint activities.27 On 10 July 1946, OP-
20-G was deactivated, and all US Navy Comint intercept and processing
units around the world were merged into a new organization headquartered
in Washington DC called the Communications Supplementary Activities
(CSA).28
     Postwar demobilization and deep cuts in the US defense budget badly
hurt the Army and Navy Comint organizations. By the summer of 1946,
ASA’s personnel strength had dropped from 27,000 at the end of World War
II to less than 4,000 military and civilian personnel.29 CSA’s manpower
strength fell from 9,100 in September 1945 to about 3,000 military and
civilian personnel by mid-1946.30 In the late 1940s, two more American
cryptologic organizations were created. On 20 October 1948, a third
American Comint organization was created when the US Air Force activated
its own Comint organization, the US Air Force Security Service (USAFSS).31
By the end of 1949, USAFSS consisted of a 150-man headquarters staff in
San Antonio, Texas, plus 600 personnel assigned to five field units.32
     On 20 May 1949, Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson issued a directive
creating the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA), under which was
placed the responsibility for the direction and control of all US
Communications Intelligence (Comint) and Communications Security
(Comsec) activities except for tactical cryptologic activities, which
remained under the control of the Army, Navy and Air Force.33 AFSA’s
headquarters staff in Washington DC consisted of slightly more than 4,500
personnel (1,240 military and 3,279 civilians). Almost all of AFSA’s
headquarters staff would come from the Army and the Navy, with the Navy
providing the majority of AFSA’s military personnel, and the Army
contributed the majority of AFSA’s civilian staff.34
    By the time of the Korean War began in June 1950, the US Sigint
community had rebounded somewhat, with AFSA and the three Service
Cryptologic Agencies (SCAs) together consisting of about 16,000 military
and civilian personnel.35
    Geographical factors made the task of intercepting Russian radio traffic
far more difficult than German and Japanese communications during World
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                 33

War II. This meant that the US and Great Britain had to reformulate the
agreements signed during World War II in order to reflect the difficulties
associated with collecting intelligence on the new Soviet target. On 5 March
1946, a Top Secret 25-page document called the British-United States
Communications Intelligence Agreement (BRUSA) was signed, which
renewed the 1943 bilateral agreement between the two countries to
cooperate in the field of Comint.36 In June 1948, the US and Great Britain
signed a new agreement, called the UK-USA Communications Intelligence
Agreement (UKUSA), which in essence delineated the division of Comint
effort by the parties to the agreement against the Soviet Union and its
communist allies. Under the terms of the UKUSA agreement, scarce
Comint intercept and processing resources were allocated and targets
carefully chosen by the US, Britain, and key member nations of the British
Commonwealth, specifically Canada, Australia and New Zealand.37
    Throughout the Cold War, the relationship between NSA and GCHQ,
which was the core of the UKUSA Agreement, was constantly evolving with
the time. And yet, there was a fundamental doctrine which bound the two
organizations together despite the political, military and economic sea
changes that marked the relationship between the US and Great Britain. The
man whom many NSA officials credit with being the ‘father’ of the UKUSA,
former NSA deputy director Dr Louis Tordella, believed that NSA ‘had a
partnership with GCHQ and that we shared tasking and operations but could
function independently of one another’. According to Tordella, ‘We are each
mindful of our national interests but can still find common ground.’38
    Recently declassified decrypts and materials found by Western
researchers in the KGB archives in Moscow show that the UKUSA partners
were remarkably successful in their early efforts against the codes and
ciphers of the Soviet Union and its allies. These new materials reveal that
despite the fact that the Americans and British cryptanalysts apparently
could not solve most of the high-level Soviet diplomatic ciphers in use
during the late 1940s, they were getting a great deal of good intelligence
information from intercepted Soviet communications about the strength and
capabilities of the Soviet armed forces, the production capacity of Soviet
industry, and even some useful intelligence about Soviet work in the field
of atomic energy.39
    Declassified documents show that the Americans and British were able
to collect this information because following the end of World War II, the
Soviet military continued to use a large number of foreign-made
cryptographic systems, which the Russians had either acquired under Lend
Lease from the US and Britain, or which they had captured from the
Germans during World War II. It was the Russian military’s use of these
systems that the American and British cryptanalysts initially exploited.40
34      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    The first Russian machine cipher system that was solved was a Russian
version of the Hagelin B211 cipher machine, which presumably had been
captured by the Russians from German forces during World War II. By
September 1945, American cryptanalysts had reconstructed the internal
wiring of the machine’s rotors, and a copy of the machine was made, which
was called Sauterne Mark I. Beginning on 4 April 1946, a regular supply of
Sauterne decrypts began being produced by the US Navy cryptanalysts.41 In
late 1945, ASA cryptanalysts began attacking a more sophisticated Enigma-
type cipher machine system used by the Russian Army, which was given the
codename ‘Albatross’. According to available information, it took ASA’s
cryptanalysts years to figure out the internal workings of the machine, and
it was not until the late 1940s that ‘Albatross’ was reportedly solved.42
    In March 1946, the British began sending to ASA and CSA intelligence
information derived from their solution of another Russian cipher machine
system that the British called Coleridge, which was used on Soviet Army,
Navy and Air Force mainline teletype nets. The Coleridge decrypts
generated important information about the Soviet military’s order of battle,
training activities, and logistics matters.43
    The Russian Army cipher system called RUMUA-1 by the American
and British cryptanalysts was solved in the fall of 1948. ASA engineers
managed to reconstruct the RUMUA cipher machine, which was known as
the RUMUA Tan Analogue. Other recently declassified documents revealed
that in October 1949, the ASA scored what was then deemed to be a
significant cryptologic success against a Soviet military cipher system being
used in the Far East, but no further details have been released concerning
this particular success.44
    In 1947, ASA cryptanalysts solved the RUARA-1 operational cipher
system which was then being used by the Soviet Air Force headquarters in
Moscow to communicate with its subordinate commands throughout the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.45 By 1948, US Army cryptanalysts in Japan
had solved the operational ciphers used by the Soviet 9th and 10th Air Armies
at Vozdvizhenka and Khabarovsk respectively in the Soviet Far East.46
    Some significant cryptanalytic successes were also achieved against
Soviet naval cipher systems. In late 1945, CS A and GCHQ were trying to
solve three Soviet naval code and cipher systems, known as RUNLB-1,
RUNLC-1, and RUNMD-1.47 CSA’s cryptanalysts solved the cipher system
used by Soviet Navy headquarters in Moscow in September 1948, followed
in November 1948 by the solution of some of the cryptographic systems used
by the Russian Navy in the Far East. There was also some success in reading
the cipher systems used by the two fleets operating in the Baltic Sea, as well
as those cryptographic systems used by the Black Sea Fleet and the Caspian
Sea Flotilla.48
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                 35
    American and British cryptanalysts also managed to solve a significant
number of high-level Eastern European diplomatic, military, intelligence
and internal security systems during the early days of the Cold War.
Decrypts of Eastern European diplomatic traffic revealed the details of the
complicated and sometimes strained relationship between the Soviet Union
and its Eastern European allies, such as the degree of Soviet influence over
the governments of Eastern Europe, the military and political response of
the Soviet Union to the formation on NATO, and the political reaction of the
Eastern European states to the withdrawal of Marshal Tito’s Yugoslavia
from the Cominform in 1948.49
    Many (but not all) of these Anglo-American cryptologic successes came
to an abrupt end on the morning of 29 October 1948, when the Russians
executed a massive worldwide change of their cryptographic systems and
communications operating procedures. This day is still known as ‘Black
Friday’ within NSA. This move by the Russians was prompted by the
treachery of William W. Weisband, a Russian linguist and cryptanalyst
working inside the Army Security Agency, who sold to the Russians
information about ASA’s codebreaking efforts. By July 1949, Weisband
was able to tell his KGB handler in Washington that ASA had ‘suddenly
lost the ability to read Russian cables, and the head of the [ASA]
deciphering service was concerned that a Communist might have
penetrated its ranks’.50
    Despite the Black Friday disaster, in the decades that followed NSA and
its UKUSA partners not only survived, but prospered. As will be detailed
below, perseverance and adaptation are recurring themes in the story of
Sigint during the Cold War.

SIGINT IN THE 1950S

Starting with the North Korean invasion of South Korea on 25 June 1950,
the US Sigint System (USSS) underwent dramatic change and growth as the
Cold War heated up.
    By 1951, American military and civilian intelligence officials had
become extremely unhappy about the performance of AFSA and American
Sigint during the Korean War. For example, in mid-1951 the commander of
US forces in Far East, General Matthew B. Ridgway, was furious about the
poor quality of the Comint support that he was receiving in Korea.51 The
director of the CIA, General Walter Bedell Smith and his deputies were also
extremely unhappy with the condition of the American Comint community,
warning that ‘existing means of control over, and coordination of, the
collection and processing of Communications Intelligence have proved
ineffective’.52
36      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    On 24 October 1952 President Harry S. Truman signed a Top Secret
eight-page directive entitled ‘Communications Intelligence Activities’,
which made Comint a national responsibility, and directed that all American
Comint activities ‘must be so organized and managed as to exploit to the
maximum the available resources of all participating departments and
agencies and to satisfy the legitimate intelligence requirements of all such
departments and agencies.’ The directive abolished AFSA and transferred
all of its responsibilities and resources to the newly created National
Security Agency (NSA).53
    The Korean War rejuvenated the American Sigint effort. By late 1952,
NSA consisted of more than 30,000 military and civilian personnel.54 By
1960, eight years after the Agency had been created, NSA had more than
doubled in size to approximately 65,000 military and civilian personnel, of
whom about 10,000 worked at NSA headquarters at Fort Meade,
Maryland.55
    Between 1950 and 1960, NSA constructed at a cost of hundreds of
millions of dollars a multi-layered network of 70 strategic intercept stations
and an equal number of tactical Comint units around the world. This
network of American Sigint intercept stations, together with the 35 or so
radio intercept stations operated by Britain, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand, stretched completely around the periphery of the Soviet Union,
Eastern Europe, the People’s Republic of China and North Korea, and was
able to copy all important shortwave radio traffic coming from inside these
countries.
    Add to this mix the not inconsiderable Sigint collection resources of
NSA’s Third Party partners in Norway, Denmark, West Germany, Austria,
Italy, Greece, Turkey, Pakistan, Thailand, Nationalist China, Japan, and
South Korea, and one can make the argument that the UKUSA partners
possessed the largest and geographically best situated Sigint collection
system in the world, even if the Soviet Sigint system was larger in terms of
personnel.
    NSA’s success rate built slowly during the 1950s as the agency grew and
became more capable, but the learning process was slow and at times
painful. A former senior NSA official recalled that ‘We [NSA] were on
probation in those early years. We were constantly being examined and
reexamined. We owed our success in part to [President Dwight D.]
Eisenhower, who remembered how important Comint had been to him
during the war, and wasn’t going to jeopardize that.’56 Despite its slow start,
the US intelligence community’s dependence on the Sigint product coming
out of NSA was admitted by virtually every senior American intelligence
official who testified in 1952 before a review panel headed by New York
attorney George Brownell, which was tasked with examining the American
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                     37
Comint effort. According to the Brownell panel’s final report, America’s
intelligence ‘Mandarins’ unanimously stated their belief that Comint was
the United States’ single most important source of intelligence
information.57 A Top Secret 1955 study commissioned by the White House
found that Comint was ‘the timeliest, most complete, and most reliable
source of intelligence’ available to the US intelligence community.58
    Solving high-level Russian cipher traffic was an extremely difficult
proposition during the 1950s. Russian radio operators made fewer mistakes
than they had during the 1940s, and the Russian traffic became increasing
more difficult to decipher as newer and more sophisticated encipherment
techniques became available.59 But there is some evidence that by the mid-
1950s, NSA and its allies had solved some high-level Soviet machine cipher
systems with the help of the huge computers in NSA’s basement. A recently
declassified NSA historical study revealed that NSA may have solved a
high-level Soviet machine cipher system in 1954, which would have been
the first significant American cryptanalytic success against Soviet
cryptologic systems since ‘Black Friday’ on 29 October 1948.60 By 1958,
the West Germans had solved a Russian cryptographic system called PT-53,
although it is not known how important this system was or who within the
Russian military used it.61 A former US Air Force cryptologist has indicated
that by 1959, NSA had solved additional high-level Soviet cryptographic
systems.62
    Sigint was by far the best source for hard intelligence about the strength,
capabilities and activities of the Soviet armed forces, which was the primary
focus of the US intelligence effort during the 1950s.
    Comint was one of the principal sources for information about Russian
strategic bomber activities. Sigint helped debunk the myth that the Russians
had more strategic bombers than the US by tracking the delivery flights of
Russian bombers from the factories where they had been built to their
operational bases throughout Russia. Sigint also revealed that the combat
readiness levels of the Russian bomber force was low, that Soviet bombers
did not have the range of their American counterparts, that the flying skills
of the Soviet crews were deficient because of a lack of flying time, and that
the Russians had no mid-air refueling capability, which made it virtually
impossible for the Soviets to strike targets in the Continental United States.63
    Sigint was virtually the only viable source for reliable intelligence about
the strength and capabilities of the Soviet national air defense command, the
Protivovozdushnaya Oborona Strany (PVO). Elint was the Strategic Air
Command’s principal source of hard intelligence information about the
locations and detection capabilities of the early warning radars positioned
around the periphery of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.64 On 16 May
1955, a Secret directive entitled National Security Council Intelligence
38      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Directive No. 17, Electronics Intelligence, was issued. NSCID 17
established for the first time a unified National Elint Program that brought
together the disparate Elint collection and processing efforts of the three US
military services and the CIA, and focused their efforts almost exclusively
against the Soviet Union and its allies. In addition, the directive ordered the
creation of a new national Elint processing and analysis organization called
the National Technical Processing Center (NTPC), which was situated on
the grounds of the Naval Security Station in Washington DC. NTPC was run
by the US Air Force as Executive Agent for the Department of Defense, but
was staffed by personnel from all three military services and the CIA.65
    From Comint intercepts of PVO radio traffic, American intelligence
analysts were able to accurately measure the alertness, timeliness and
accuracy of the PVO’s radars and its command and control system; the
reaction times, weapons capabilities and altitude limitations of the Soviet air
defense fighter force; as well as map the order of battle of the PVO, all of
which was essential information for planning strategic bombing attacks on
the Soviet Union.66 A former US Air Force intercept operator who
monitored PVO radar tracking communications has confirmed how
important the intelligence information from this source was: ‘During my
tenure our main job was to identify Russian and Chinese strengths by
determining where their bases were, how many and what type of aircraft
they had, and how long it would take them to scramble and intercept a
hostile [aircraft]. We did this by monitoring their radar stations.’67
    Comint generated vitally important intelligence information on the
movements and activities of Russian Army combat units in Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union; the results of Soviet nuclear weapons tests on Novaya
Zemlya in the Soviet Arctic; and Soviet military logistics and transportation
activities.68
    Comint coverage of the radio traffic of the Soviet tactical air force
(Frontal Aviation) allowed American intelligence analysts to ascertain by
1957 the location of the FA’s 320 Soviet fighter and 61 bomber regiments
and identify what kind of aircraft each regiment flew. Comint also tracked
Soviet aircraft movements, followed FA training exercises, and determined
the level of experience and capabilities of Soviet fighter and bomber crews.
Comint coverage of the SAF also yielded information about Russian
weapons production, capabilities of weapons systems, data on fuel
consumption and storage levels, and other logistical information.69
    Monitoring the activities of the Russian Navy was particularly difficult
because at the time it rarely left home waters. One of the solutions was the
use of US Navy submarines to perform reconnaissance missions designed
to monitor Soviet naval activities, including extensive Sigint collection of
Soviet naval radio traffic. In February 1957, the American diesel attack
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                   39
submarine USS Tirante (SS 420) commenced the first of a series of US
Navy submarine reconnaissance patrols off the Soviet port of Murmansk,
which duplicated similar operations then being undertaken by American
submarines monitoring the activities of the Soviet Navy in the Pacific. In
August 1957, for example, the attack submarine USS Gudgeon (SS 567)
conducted a reconnaissance mission off Vladivostok, but was detected by
Soviet naval forces and depth charged for 30 hours by Soviet naval forces
until finally it was forced to surface because of a lack of oxygen. The
Russians allowed the Gudgeon to flee the area rather than destroy it. In early
1958, the diesel attack submarine USS Wahoo (SS 565) was caught by
Russian naval units inside their territorial waters in the Far East and forced
to flee after being depth charged. On board the submarine was a young
American naval officer who would later become the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and then Ambassador to London, William J. Crowe Jr.70
    The data obtained from NSA’s 24 hour-a-day Comint monitoring of
these Soviet military targets allowed American intelligence analysts to
follow even minute changes in Soviet military strength and capabilities, as
well as spot variances from the day-to-day norm which might be indicative
of a potential Soviet invasion. NSA analysts watched for any sign of
anomalous Soviet military behavior; including dramatic increases in the
volume of Soviet military radio traffic; the changing of major code and
cipher systems; the formation of new military units and headquarters; the
‘fleshing out’ of Red Army combat divisions; intensified or more realistic
training exercises; large scale redeployment of combat forces and support
units from the Russian hinterland to Eastern Europe or the border with
China and North Korea; surge deployments of Soviet naval units and
submarines from their home ports; the movement of strategic bombers and
tactical air units to forward bases and dispersal fields in the Arctic; the
activation of the Russian emergency command posts and related emergency
communications networks; the withdrawal of Aeroflot civilian airliners
from regularly scheduled service to augment the military air transport
service; increased rail and commercial shipping traffic, and other logistical
preparations for war.71
    It is true that Sigint failed to provide any warning prior to the North
Korean invasion of South Korea on 25 June 1950.72 Sigint had detected
Soviet military forces in the Far East having been placed on a higher degree
of alert just prior to the North Korean invasion, including increased radio
traffic among Soviet air, air defense, and submarine forces in the region.73
After the invasion, Sigint monitoring of Soviet communications revealed
that Russian forces in the Far East had been moved to a higher state of alert
and that some 20,000 to 25,000 troops of the Russian 25th Army had been
moved to the North Korean border. But Sigint found no further signs of any
40      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Soviet military preparations indicative of intent to intervene in Korea.74
Sigint also provided warnings of the Soviet intention to crush the popular
uprising in Budapest, Hungary by military means in November 1956. The
month before, October 1956, Comint intercepts tracked 40 Russian tank
battalions converging on the Hungarian capital to crush the civilian uprising
there.75
     The introduction of the U-2 spyplane by the CIA in 1956 did not
materially affect the importance of Comint within the US intelligence
community. By the late 1950s, Sigint and U-2 imagery were deemed to be
the most credible and productive sources of hard intelligence available to
the West about what was going on inside the Soviet Union, accounting for
75 per cent of the information available about the Soviet military. And not
surprisingly, Comint and U-2 imagery provided the bulk of the material
used by the CIA in drawing up the Top Secret National Intelligence
Estimates (NIE) on Soviet military capabilities that went to the White
House and other high-level intelligence consumers in Washington.76
     It should be noted, however, that the much-touted U-2 overflight
program of the Soviet Union had its fair share of problems. First, it does not
take a genius to realize that an average of five overflights a year between
1956 and 1960 of the Soviet Union was not nearly enough to adequately
follow Soviet military and technological developments. Nor was the U-2
capable of providing any warning of an impending Soviet attack. Worse
still, in order to protect the source of the U-2 imagery, CIA photo
interpreters were ordered to convert the photos into detailed drawings
before they could be distributed to analysts with no reference to what was
the source of the information. As a result, many analysts openly questioned
the veracity of the information contained in these drawings, with some
analysts claiming that they were fabrications.77
     Sigint also had non-military applications when it came to the Soviet
target. For instance, the so-called Venona decrypts were a crucial weapon in
allowing the FBI and its counterparts in Britain and Australia to identify and
neutralize several Soviet spy rings during the 1950s, although it should be
noted that only 15 of the 206 Soviet agents identified as having spied for the
Soviet Union were ever prosecuted, in large part because the secrecy of
these decrypts prevented them from being used in an American court of
law.78
     By 1954, NSA appears to have penetrated the communications system
of the Soviet national civil defense network.79 NSA was able to gather
information about the performance of the Soviet economy, such as
information about Soviet foreign trade, internal consumer goods policies,
gold production, petroleum shipments, shipbuilding activities, as well as
military and civilian aircraft production.80 Comint was also used to track the
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                   41
movements of officials belonging to the Soviet ministry responsible for
arms sales, thus giving advanced warning of where Russian weapons were
about to be exported.81
    From the 1950s onwards, the US and its UKUSA partners became
increasingly dependent on clandestine means for many of their Sigint
successes as cryptographic systems became increasingly difficult to solve
by traditional cryptanalytic means. In 1953, a very small and highly secret
unit was created within the CIA called Staff D (renamed Division D in the
 1960s), whose mission was to steal foreign cryptographic materials, recruit
foreign government code clerks, tap communications lines, and plant audio
surveillance devices in the code rooms of foreign government offices
overseas.82 In the US, specially trained teams of FBI agents, all graduates of
the FBI Laboratory’s ‘Sound School’ at Quantico, Virginia, broke into
foreign diplomatic establishments in Washington DC and New York City to
obtain cryptologic material for NSA. In one instance, FBI agents drove a
garbage truck into the central courtyard of the Czech embassy in
Washington DC in the middle of the night and spirited away one of the
embassy’s cipher machines for study.83 In 1953, MI6 created its own
cryptologic unit, called Section Y, which was responsible for intercepting
through surreptitious means Soviet and other nations’ military and
diplomatic communications, including the use of microphone
eavesdropping devices planted in Soviet and Warsaw Pact embassies.84 MI5,
the British internal security service, also formed its own clandestine unit in
the mid-1950s, which specialized in bugging foreign embassies in London.85
    Few details of the successes of these units have made their way into the
public realm. The joint CIA-MI6 Berlin Tunnel cable tapping operation,
which ran from 1954 to 1956, produced reams of invaluable high-level
intelligence information concerning the strength and capabilities of Soviet
military forces in East Germany; data on the reduction in size of the Soviet
armed forces and Soviet military cooperation with the other Eastern
European nations; Soviet political intentions in Berlin; details about the
Soviet Union’s relationship with the newly created East German
government; the first indications that East Germany was creating its own
army; details of the Soviet Union’s nuclear weapons program; and
information about Soviet and East German intelligence operations.86

SIGINT IN THE 1960S
In many respects, during the 1960s NSA reached the peak of its power. The
growth of NSA continued unabated during the 1960s, in large part because
of the demands of the Vietnam War. By 1969, NSA and the other
components of the US Sigint System (USSS) had grown to more than
42      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

95,000 military and civilian personnel, 15,000–16,000 of whom worked at
NSA headquarters at Fort Meade, Maryland.87
    The 1960s also marked the nadir of the American Humint program
against the Soviet Union, and the ascendancy of high-tech spying to the top
of the American intelligence community. During the 1960s, the CIA’s
Humint effort against the Soviet Union was decimated by a molehunt that
devastated the Agency’s operations inside Russia. By one account, as of
1968 the CIA had only five relatively low-level agents reporting from inside
the Soviet Union.88 For example, the CIA’s Humint assets inside the Soviet
Union, including Colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, failed to detect the Soviet
military’s movement of men and weaponry to Cuba prior to the 1962 Cuban
Missile Crisis. Rather, these missiles were discovered by CIA operatives in
Cuba well after the missiles had arrived in that country.89 It should be noted
that MI6’s operations against the Soviet Union during the 1960s were also
paralyzed by a massive internal molehunt. It was not until the 1971
recruitment of a Soviet trade official named Oleg Lyalin that MI6 once
again began recruiting Russian agents.90
    As the quantity and quality of intelligence produced by Humint sources
about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain declined, American
intelligence analysts out of necessity came to increasingly rely to an even
greater degree on Sigint and the newly developed photo reconnaissance
satellites that were being put into space beginning in the early 1960s by the
newly created National Reconnaissance Office (NRO).91
    There were three major problems, however, with the satellite
reconnaissance photos that CIA historians have perhaps conveniently
forgotten to mention in the recent spate of writings about the origins of the
American reconnaissance satellite program: (1) the satellite photographs
were so highly classified that only a few intelligence analysts were allowed
access to them; (2) the CIA’s reconnaissance satellites had an extremely
limited focus, namely, Soviet strategic military and industrial targets; and
(3) it usually took weeks from the time the photos were taken until the
moment they made their way to the intelligence analysts, which meant that
satellite imagery had limited utility during fast-moving crises. Not
surprisingly, these factors severely limited the utility of the product coming
from NRO’s reconnaissance satellites. It was not until the late 1970s that the
security classification of satellite imagery was downgraded and made more
available to intelligence consumers.92
    These limitations on the use of imagery obtained from the photo
reconnaissance satellites further enhanced the importance of Sigint, which
remained the premier source of timely and reliable intelligence available to
the US intelligence community during the 1960s, despite its rapidly
escalating cost in terms of both human and material resources.93
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                  43
    Sigint performed particularly well during a series of international crises
involving the Soviet Union during the 1960s. In July 1962, NSA’s Comint
coverage of Soviet merchant marine communications traffic revealed a
dramatic surge in the number of Soviet merchant ships arriving in Cuba
with undisclosed cargos.94 Two months later, in September 1962, the first
hard indications of the presence of Soviet military forces in Cuba were
detected by the NSA spyship USS Oxford.95 Two months prior to the June
1967 Arab–Israeli War, Comint detected the movement of a division of
Soviet airborne troops and their supporting transport aircraft from the
Transcaucasus Military District in the Soviet Union to Bulgaria as well as
other military preparations.96
    During the spring and summer of 1968, Sigint detected the movement of
34 Russian combat divisions into Czechoslovakia or to positions along its
border, the deployment of 400 Soviet military aircraft to airfields in Poland
and East Germany, the call up thousands of reserve military personnel in the
Baltic, Belorussian and Carpathian Military Districts in the western Soviet
Union, and the activation of a new theater headquarters in the Carpathian
Military District. On 20 August 1968, the Soviets invaded Czechoslovakia.97
    During the August 1969 fighting between Soviet and Chinese forces
along the Amur Ussuri Rivers, Sigint detected that Russian strategic bomber
regiments deployed in Central Asia and the Far East had been placed on
alert, as well as accelerated Soviet photo reconnaissance satellite activity,
transport aircraft bringing additional Russian troops and supplies to
reinforce Soviet forces in the Far East; the deployment of additional fighter
and fighter bomber units to air bases in the Far East and Mongolia; a
heightened alert status of Soviet air defense forces in the Far East; and the
activation of a special Soviet Army headquarters complex near
Khabarovsk.98
    There is some evidence that NSA made some important strides during
the 1960s against high-level Soviet cryptographic systems. According to
press reports, in April 1964 NSA broke the Silver cipher system used by
Russian military forces in Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis.99 Until at
least 1973, NSA was reportedly able to read the communications traffic
between Moscow and the Russian ambassador in Washington, Anatoly
Dobrynin.100 NSA was also apparently able to read some of the Soviet
diplomatic traffic passing between Moscow and its embassies in North
Vietnam and Laos during the Vietnam War.101 In February 1967, NSA and
GCHQ were able to intercept the telephone conversations between Soviet
Premier Alexei Kosygin and President Leonid Brezhnev while Kosygin was
staying in London trying to negotiate a settlement to the Vietnam War.102 As
of the spring of 1967, NSA was reportedly reading Soviet diplomatic radio
traffic between Moscow and its representatives in Egypt, which showed that
44      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the Soviets were convinced that war between Israel and Egypt was
imminent.103
    The Soviet target was obviously not the only subject of NSA’s attentions
in Eastern Europe. During the 1960s and 1970s, the NSA-GCHQ listening
post at Teufelsberg in West Berlin was reading East German Communist
Party (SED) communications traffic, the communications of the East
German Army and Air Force, as well as the most secret communications
traffic of the East German Ministry of State Security (STASI).104 By
analyzing hundreds of intercepted East German commercial telegrams, in
the late 1960s the US Army Security Agency’s Target Exploitation
(TAREX) office in Frankfurt, Germany was able to identify the complete
order of battle of the East German Army.105
     Sigint performed particularly well on strategic military subjects during
the 1960s. In 1961, American engineers and analysts made their first break
into the Soviet missile telemetry signals that had been intercepted since
1955 by NSA, allowing intelligence analysts for the first time to extract
performance data on Soviet strategic missiles then being tested as well as on
Soviet space flights. For the next 15 years, NSA and the CIA were able to
read virtually all Soviet telemetry signals, and thus understand the
intricacies of all Soviet missile systems being developed, as well as Soviet
activities in space.106
    The launch of the first ‘Ferret’ satellites in the early 1960s
revolutionized Elint collection against the Soviet Union. Between 1963 and
 1967, American Ferret satellites completely mapped the locations and
ascertained the capabilities of virtually every Soviet radar site in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union, a mammoth task by any measure, as well as
all Chinese, North Korean and North Vietnamese radar systems. By 1967,
the Elint database was so detailed that the CIA was able to issue the first
truly comprehensive National Intelligence Estimate on the state of Soviet
air defenses, based largely on Sigint.107
     Sigint was crucial in allowing the US intelligence community to follow
Soviet Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) activities during the 1960s. In the early
 1960s, American Elint sensors mapped the locations and capabilities of the
first Soviet ABM early warning radars called ‘Hen House’ that were being
built around the periphery of the Soviet Union. In 1968, Sigint provided the
first detailed information about the capabilities and weaknesses of three
new Soviet ABM radars deployed around Moscow.108
     At the operational level, NSA’s Sigint coverage of the Soviet military
during the 1960s gave American intelligence analysts an incredibly detailed
view of what was going on deep inside the Soviet Union, as well as allowed
the US intelligence community to track the increasing tempo of Russian
military activities outside the Soviet Union. For instance, in the 1960s a new
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                    45
worldwide ocean surveillance Sigint system called ‘Classic Bullseye’ was
activated, which merged and modernized the naval Sigint intercept and high
frequency direction finding (HFDF) resources of all five UKUSA members
nations. ‘Classic Bullseye’ was an automated HFDF system that was larger,
faster and more capable than the manual HFDF systems previously used by
the UKUSA Sigint organizations, and allowed the US Navy and its English-
speaking partners to track in near realtime the movements and activities of
Soviet warships and submarines around the world. By the early 1970s, the
US Naval Security Group Command was operating 21 ‘Classic Bullseye’
HFDF stations in the US and around the world. The American stations were
integrated with eight modernized HFDF stations operated by NSA’s
UKUSA partners.109
    At about the same time, Britain’s GCHQ began operating a highly
sensitive direction finding system called ‘Sambo’, which was used to locate
and record the burst transmissions from Soviet ‘Yankee’ and ‘Delta’-class
ballistic missile submarines that were patrolling in the North Atlantic.110
    In 1972, a former US Air Force intelligence analyst described the extent
of NSA’s intelligence coverage of the Soviet military as follows:111
     As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, we know the whereabouts at
     any given time of all its aircraft, exclusive of small private planes, and
     its naval forces, including its missile-firing submarines. The fact is
     that we’re able to break every code they’ve got, understand every type
     of communications equipment and enciphering device they’ve got.
     We know where their submarines are, what every one of their VIPs is
     doing, and generally their capabilities and the disposition of all their
     forces. This information is constantly computer correlated, updated,
     and the operations go on twenty-four hours a day.
   By the late 1960s, satellite imagery and Sigint were rated by the CIA as
the two most ‘essential sources’ needed to verify any arms control treaty
with the Soviet Union.112 In Vietnam, American military commanders
became so dependent on Sigint that an American intelligence officer told a
congressional committee that American military commanders in Vietnam
‘were getting Sigint with their orange juice every morning and have now
come to expect it everywhere’.113

SIGINT IN THE 1970s

Following the end of American troop withdrawal from Vietnam in 1972,
NSA’s budget was severely cut, and the Agency’s manpower fell from
95,000 to approximately 52,000 military and civilian personnel by 1980, of
whom 19,900 personnel worked at NSA headquarters.114 Despite the cuts in
46      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

its size, NSA remained a behemoth within the US intelligence community.
A former senior NSA official recalled that by the early 1970s, NSA had ‘...
become a several billion dollar a year corporation, with thousands of people
operating a global system’.115
    According to some sources, the overall importance of Comint within the
US intelligence community declined in the 1970s. In part, this was because
a GCHQ employee named Geoffrey Prime compromised the few remaining
high-level Soviet systems that the US and Britain could still read during the
mid-1970s.116 But the main reason for the decline of Comint in the 1970s
was the advent of microelectronics and new computer-based encryption
technologies, all of which made it increasingly difficult for NSA and its
allies to solve foreign cryptographic systems. A presidential review panel
was forced to report in 1975 that‘Thereason for the decline in importance
[of Comint] is that the senders have come out ahead of the interceptors in
the never-ending struggle to encrypt messages so that they cannot be
deciphered.’117
    Despite the doomsayers, in fact the 1970s was the era when Sigint and
Imint came to truly dominate the US intelligence community. A 1976 study
of US intelligence reporting on the Soviet Union found that virtually all of
the material contained in the CIA’s National Intelligence Estimates about
Soviet strategic and conventional military forces came from Sigint and
satellite imagery.118 Conversely, a 1975 study of the US intelligence
community found that less than 5 per cent of the finished intelligence being
generated by it came from Humint.119
    NSA and its partners adapted to the changing technological
environment during the 1970s. A series of new high-tech Sigint collection
systems came online in the 1970s, which gave the US and its allies
increased access to high-level Soviet and Warsaw Pact communications
traffic. During the 1970s, several generations of Sigint satellites were put
into space, including the ‘Canyon’, ‘Jumpseat’ and ‘Chalet’ Comint
satellites, which gave NSA access to high-level microwave communications
traffic inside the Soviet Union that it had never had before.120 The level of
detail obtained from these satellites was so high that a former American
intelligence officer stated that ‘we could hear their teeth chattering in the
Ukraine’.121 The CIA’s ‘Rhyolite’ Telint satellite revolutionized the US
intelligence community’s knowledge of Soviet strategic weapons
development by intercepting previously unheard telemetry coming from
Soviet strategic ballistic missile and bomber testing deep inside the Soviet
Union. A new US Navy Elint ocean surveillance satellite called ‘White
Cloud’ allowed the US Navy to track the movements of Russian Navy
warships to a degree that heretofore had not been possible. And a new,
fourth-generation Elint ferret satellite called ‘Farrah’ gave the US
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                      47
intelligence community exceptional detail about the new Soviet ABM
radars and weapons systems then being developed.122
    When the Soviet Union began shifting a significant part of its
communications traffic to communications satellites in the 1970s, NSA and
its UKUSA partners established a worldwide network of stations to
intercept this new source of raw traffic. Dozens of new covert listening
posts were established inside American, British, Canadian and Australian
embassies around the world, especially behind the Iron Curtain, to intercept
internal radio and telephone traffic.123
    As before, NSA continued to produced high-grade intelligence
information. In 1972, intercepts from the NSA listening post inside the US
embassy in Moscow revealed an important part of the Soviet negotiating
position during a summit meeting in Moscow leading up to the signing of the
first Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) agreement. A senior US
intelligence official who read the intercepts was quoted as saying ‘That’s the
sort of thing that pays NSA’s wages for a year.’124 In the fall of 1973, decrypts
of Soviet traffic revealed that the Soviet Union had become concerned about
the likelihood of war between Egypt and Israel, and was concerned about the
safety of the Russian citizens and dependents living in Egypt.125
     In the 1970s, improved Sigint coverage of Soviet ballistic missile
submarine communications, together with the Sound Surveillance System
(SOSUS) underwater acoustic tracking network, allowed American
intelligence analysts to accurately track the movements of Soviet
submarines as they increasingly ventured further out into the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans. The coverage was reportedly so good that US Navy analysts
were able to pinpoint the location of the patrol ‘boxes’ off the North
American coastline frequented by Soviet ballistic missile submarines.126
     On 22 December 1979, three days before the first of 85,000 Soviet
troops crossed the Soviet-Afghan border on 25 December 1979, NSA was
able to report to the White House that the Russians intended to invade
Afghanistan.127 In the late 1970s, NSA helped the FBI determine which
US government telephone calls the Soviets were intercepting from inside
their diplomatic establishments in Washington, New York and San
Francisco.128

SIGINT IN THE 1980s

During the 1980s, NSA once again grew dramatically in size. As of 1989,
the year the Berlin Wall came down, there were 75,000 American military,
civilian and contractor personnel performing the Sigint mission in the US
and overseas. Of the 75,000 personnel working for the Agency, almost
25,000 worked at NSA headquarters at Fort Meade, Maryland.129
48        SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                         FIGURE 2.1




US Army radio intercept operators at the listening post at Misawa, Japan, in 1982.
                                                         US Army Intelligence & Security Command


                                         FIGURE 2.2




AN/FRD-10 antenna array at the US Navy listening post near Homestead Air Force Base, Florida.
                                                         US Army Intelligence & Security Command
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                                49
                                       FIGURE 2.3




Antenna tower at the US Army border intercept site at Wobeck, West Germany.
                                                      US Army Intelligence & Security Command
50      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Continuing the trend that began in the 1960s, NSA’s traditional Comint
collection programs continued to produce less information because of a
dramatic increase in worldwide telecommunications traffic volumes,
which NSA had great difficulty coping with; and the growing availability
and complexity of new telecommunications technologies, such as
cheaper and more sophisticated encryption systems.130 By the late 1980s,
the number of intercepted messages flowing into NSA headquarters at
Fort Meade had increased to the point that the Agency’s staff and
computers were only able to process about 20 per cent of the incoming
materials.131
    But despite these obstacles, the 1980s was a boomtime for NSA and its
UKUSA partners, with the Agency enjoying some unheralded successes.
Former CIA director Robert M. Gates recently stated that ‘The truth is,
until the late 1980s, US signals intelligence was way out in front of the rest
of the world.’132 The former Director of Intelligence of the US Marine
Corps described Sigint as ‘the success story of the 1980s’.133 According to
former senior American intelligence officials, on some days during the
mid-1980s, Sigint accounted for over 70 per cent of the material contained
in President Ronald Reagan’s daily intelligence report that he received
from the CIA.134
    The depth of NSA’s Sigint coverage of Soviet Union deepened during
the 1980s, although NSA’s best known successes were in parts of the world
outside the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact.135 In late 1980, NSA and
American spy satellites detected a sizeable Soviet military buildup along the
Polish border. The military buildup was prompted by the rising popularity
of the Solidarity movement in Poland, and the inability of the Polish
government to suppress the movement.136
    In November 1983, NSA listening posts detected a dramatic increase in
Soviet military radio traffic during a NATO nuclear weapons release
exercise called ‘Able Archer 83’, reflecting the fact that Soviet forces
throughout the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe had been placed on a
heightened state of alert because of the exercise.137
    During the Achille Lauro crisis in 1985, NSA listened in on what the
Russians thought was a secure telephone line between the KGB listening
post at Lourdes, Cuba and the KGB Rezidentura in Washington DC. The
intercepts of these conversations revealed which US government
communications circuits the KGB was listening to during the crisis.138 In the
late 1980s, NSA’s Sigint satellites were used to monitor the radio circuits
used by Russian SS-24 mobile ICBM batteries in the field to communicate
with their operating bases. From these intercepts, NSA was reportedly able
to pinpoint the locations of the SS-24 main operating bases as well as the
deployment sites that the Soviets were using for their missiles.139
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                 51
    The best intelligence coverage of the April 1986 disaster at the Russian
Chernobyl nuclear reactor came from intercepts supplied by a ‘Vortex’
Sigint satellite. In May 1988, a ‘Vortex’ satellite picked up radio traffic
indicating that an explosion had taken place at a Russian missile propellant
plant at Pavlograd, which made fuel components for the Soviet SS-24
ICBM.140
    Sigint was an essential tool for monitoring Soviet forces during
the war in Afghanistan from 1979 to 1989. Sigint kept tabs on the flow
of reinforcements and supplies being sent from Russia to Afghanistan;
the effectiveness of Soviet bombing raids; the movements of Soviet
and Afghan combat units, and the mistrust that existed between the
Soviets and their Afghan allies. Sigint helped the CIA design tactics to
counter Soviet fighter bombers and helicopter gunships with new
weapons, such as the Stinger surface-to-air missiles. Sigint also revealed
that the Pakistani military and Afghan middlemen stole as much as 30 per
cent of the aid that the CIA was sending to the Mujahidin resistance
forces.141
    On the basis of Sigint data, detailed post-mortem assessments of the
1 September 1983 KAL-007 incident undertaken by NSA and the US
Air Force concluded that the massive Soviet PVO national air defense
system had not performed well. Radar tracking information had not made
its way in a timely manner from radar stations to the PVO regional
command centers or to the PVO national command center at Balashikha
outside Moscow; there was no lateral sharing of information among
various PVO command centers and operating units in the region; PVO
radar tracking data had been inaccurate and poorly assessed, with the
Korean airliner and other targets flying in the area being repeatedly
misidentified and not properly located. PVO fighter interceptors did not
respond quickly, failing to intercept the lumbering Boeing 747 airliner as
it slowly traversed the Kamchatka Peninsula and Sakhalin Island.
Apparently Soviet fighters never got closer than 20 miles to the 747 as it
cruised across Kamchatka. It took PVO fighters on Sakhalin two hours to
intercept the lumbering 747 because of faulty directions from ground
control intercept operators. The normally staid and disciplined PVO
command and control system degenerated into chaos, with the Soviet
fighter pilot who shot down the airliner, Lt Colonel Gennadi Osipovich,
having to be ordered six times to destroy the target because of incessant
radio chatter on the overloaded radio frequencies used by the fighter
pilots.142
    These findings were confirmed less than four years later in May 1987,
when a 19-year-old West German amateur pilot named Mathias Rust
managed to fly his Cessna 172 light plane 400 miles from Finland, through
52      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the heart of the PVO air defense system, and managed to successfully
land his aircraft in the middle of Red Square without a scratch. To put it
mildly, Soviet PVO officers were mortified by this embarrassing breach
of their much-vaunted air defense system. Equally shocked were
Reagan administration intelligence officials, who had loudly proclaimed
the strength of the Soviet air defense system throughout the 1980s.
NSA intercepts showed that Russian fighter interceptor pilots sent to
intercept Rust initially identified his aircraft as Finnish, causing
tremendous confusion within PVO air defense system as to how to
deal with an errant aircraft belonging to a neutral nation.143 Two days after
Rust landed on Red Square, 30 May 1987, Soviet Defense Minister
Marshal Sergei L. Sokolov and the chief of the PVO were fired by the
Politburo. Rust was convicted by a military tribunal and sentenced to four
years imprisonment, but was released after serving only one year of his
sentence.
    By the late 1980s, clandestine Sigint programs reportedly produced
almost 50 per cent of the ‘useful’ Comint coming out of NSA.144 For
example, in October 1971, the US Navy submarine USS Halibut emplaced
a tap on a Russian communications cable that ran under the surface of the
Sea of Okhotsk which linked the naval base at Petropavlovsk on
Kamchatka with the naval base at Magadan on the Soviet mainland. The
operation was called ‘Ivy Bells’. This tap generated superb intelligence for
ten years until it was betrayed to the Russians in the fall of 1981 by a
former NSA employee named Ronald W. Pelton. But unbeknownst to
Pelton, a second tap had been installed by the US Navy in August 1979 on
a cable in the Barents Sea that linked Russian naval bases on the Kola
Peninsula. This cable was still producing intelligence as late as 1990.
American intelligence officials later told Congress that the tap on the
Soviet communications cable was one of the most valuable source of
information available to NSA during the latter half of the Cold War,
particularly communications relating to the operations of the Soviet
Navy.145
    In 1980, CIA agents tapped an underground communications cable that
carried traffic between KGB headquarters in Moscow and a KGB
communications center at Troitsk, 25 miles southwest of Moscow. This
operation, designated Operation ‘TAW’, reportedly produced stellar results
for five years until it was betrayed to the Soviets in 1985 by a KGB agent
inside the CIA, Aldrich H. Ames.146
    NSA was reportedly able to break into some Soviet military computer
systems during the 1980s, yielding vast amounts of highly classified Soviet
military data. A press report suggested that some of the penetrations were
made possible by ‘Black Bag’ jobs of Soviet defense installations.147
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                    53

    The Sigint information coming from NSA clearly impressed consumers
in the White House. President Reagan’s first National Security Advisor,
Richard V. Allen, was quoted as saying that NSA ‘never ceases to amaze
me. They have incredible capabilities.’148 A former Reagan administration
intelligence official was recently quoted as saying that ‘There was a
constant stream of incredibly good stuff’ coming from NSA during the
1980s.149 In September 1986, President Ronald Reagan himself told NSA
that ‘The simple truth is: Without you I could not do my job; nor could
Secretary [of State George P.] Schultz conduct diplomacy; nor could
Secretary [of Defense Caspar] Weinberger, nor [JCS chairman] Admiral
[William J.] Crowe, muster the forces that defend us.’150 In a speech to NSA
staff at Fort Meade on 1 May 1991, President George W. Bush stated ‘As
President and Commander-in-Chief, I can assure you, signals intelligence is
a prime factor in the decisionmaking process by which we chart the course
of this nation’s foreign affairs.’151

CONCLUSIONS

So, how to sum up. Just as historians are rewriting the history of World War
II on the basis of newly released intelligence records, perhaps it is time that
we begin rewriting the history of the Cold War on the basis of the new
information that has been released concerning the important role played by
intelligence, especially Sigint and the other technical intelligence
disciplines.
    Clearly, there is no shortage of evidence to suggest that Sigint played a
vital role in helping to keep American policymakers and defense officials
informed about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain during the Cold
War. The late Senator Milton Young of North Dakota was quoted as saying
that ‘As far as foreign policy is concerned, I think the National Security
Agency and the intelligence it develops has far more to do with foreign
policy than does the intelligence developed by the CIA.’152 Canadian
historian John Ferris noted that NSA ‘probably had more influence on
American diplomacy and strategy’ than the CIA.153
    Recent statements by US government officials confirm what outsiders
have long suspected about the importance of Sigint. For instance, in May
1994, Defense Secretary William J. Perry told NSA staff members that ‘I
don’t make a significant decision without taking into account the products
from this agency... NSA’s work will be a critical factor in our ability to deal
with this particularly complex and particularly uncertain world.’154 And
former NSA director John M. McConnell has written that ‘Just as during
World War II, robust world-class signals intelligence contributed
significantly to winning the Cold War.’155
54       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    But what is presented above about the importance of NSA’s
intelligence product to US national security is clearly just the tip of
the iceberg. Because of the paucity of records released by NSA about
its Cold War accomplishments, it is difficult indeed to correctly gauge
the importance of Sigint in the Cold War. Sadly, we must await the release
of additional information from the archives of the National Security
Agency and the other Sigint agencies around the world before a more
definitive historical appreciation of the value of Sigint during the Cold
War can be made. This writer, for one, can only hope that NSA will
begin releasing more post-World War II cryptologic records in the near
future.

                                          NOTES

  1. Executive Order No. 12333, United States Intelligence Activities, 4 Dec. 1981, in Federal
     Register, Vol. 46, No. 235, 8 Dec. 1981, pp.59947–8; National Security Council
     Intelligence Directive No. 6, Signals Intelligence, 17 Feb. 1972, National Security Council
     FOIA; Department of Defense Directive No. S-5100.20, The National Security Agency and
     the Central Security Service, 23 Dec. 1971, DoD FOIA; Department of Defense Directive
     No. S-3115.7, Signals Intelligence (SIGINT), 25 Jan. 1973, DoD FOIA; United States
     Signals Intelligence Directive (USSID) 1, SIGINT Operating Policy, 29 June 1987, p.1,
     NSA FOIA; DIAM 56-3, Defense Intelligence Organization, Operations and Management,
     8 July 1979, p.21, DIA FOIA; Memo for the NSA/CSS Representative Defense, NSA
     Transition Book for the Department of Defense, 9 Dec. 1992, Top Secret Edition, pp. 1–2,
     NSA FOIA.
  2. CIA, A Consumer’s Guide to Intelligence, Sept. 1993, p. 17; Penelope S. Horgan, Signals
     Intelligence Support to US Military Commanders: Past and Present (Carlisle Barracks, PA:
     US Army War College 1991) p.113.
  3. Vice Admiral B.R. Inman, ‘The NSA Perspective on Telecommunications Protection in the
     Nongovernmental Sector’, Cryptologic Spectrum, Summer 1979, p.5.
  4. John Ferris, ‘Coming in from the Cold War: The Historiography of American Intelligence,
     1945–1990’, Diplomatic History 19/1 (Winter 1995) p.102.
  5. Memo, The Necessity for Continuance of Research and Development in the Cryptologic
     Field, undated, p.2, in Army Security Agency Summary Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1946,
     Tab 5, INSCOM FOIA.
  6. Memo, W.O. Studeman to All NSA Employees, Farewell, 8 April 1992, NSA FOIA.
  7. J.M. McConnell, ‘The Future of Sigint: Opportunities and Challenges in the Information
     Age’, Defense Intelligence Journal, Summer 2000, p.42.
  8. Copies of gists and full text decrypts of foreign military, diplomatic and other decrypts for
     the period 1945–49 can be found in RG-38, Records of the Office of the Chief of Naval
     Operations, No Entry Number, Translations of Intercepted Enemy Radio Traffic and
     Miscellaneous Materials, 1940–1946, Boxes 2739–2747, National Archives, College Park,
     Maryland (hereafter ‘NA, CP’); RG-457, Historic Cryptologie Collection, Box 192, File:
     Red Intelligence Summaries, NA, CP; RG-457, Historic Cryptologie Collection, Box 521,
     File: Decrypted Diplomatic Traffic from World War II, T3101 – T3200, NA, CP.
  9. Memo, USCIB to Secretary of Defense, 12 May 1949; Memo for the Secretary of Defense
     from Admiral Louis Denfield, USN, Atomic Energy Program of the USSR, 30 June 1949;
     and Memo for the Secretary of Defense, Atomic Energy Program of the USSR, 23 June
     1949, all in RG-330, Box 61, CD 11-1-2, NA, CP.
 10. US Senate, Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to
     Intelligence Activities, Final Report, 94th Congress, 2nd Session, 1976, Book I, p.348.
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                               55
11. H.D.S. Greenway and Paul Quinn-Judge, ‘CIA Chief Voices Final Hopes and Fears’,
    Boston Globe, 15 Jan. 1993, p.B17; Confidential interviews.
12. J.P. Cole, Geography of the Soviet Union (London: Butterworths 1984) p.3; Harold Fullard
    (ed.) Soviet Union in Maps (London: George Philip & Son 1972) p.1.
13. Technological Capabilities Panel Report, Feb. 1955, p.145, Dwight D. Eisenhower
    Library, Abilene, Kansas; Victor Marchetti and John D. Marks, The CIA and the Cult of
    Intelligence (NY: Laurel Books 1980) pp.21–2; Harry A. Rositzke, The CIA’s Secret
    Operations: Espionage, Counterespionage and Covert Action (Boulder, CO: Westview
    Press 1977) p.20; Harry A. Rositzke, The KGB: The Eyes of Russia (Garden City,
    NY: Doubleday 1981) pp.80–3; Peer de Silva, Sub Rosa: The CIA and the Uses of
    Intelligence (NY: Times Books 1978) pp.23–36; Angelo Codevilla, Informing Statecraft:
    Intelligence for a New Century (NY: Free Press 1992) p.81; Bradley F. Smith, Sharing
    Secrets With Stalin (Lawrence: UP of Kansas 1996) p.254; Gregory W. Pedlow and
    Donald E. Welzenbach, The Central Intelligence Agency and Overhead Reconnaissance:
    The U-2 and OXCART Programs, 1954–1974, April 1992, declassified by the CIA in
    Sept. 1998.
14. Olav Riste and Arnfinn Moland, Strengt Hemmelig: Norsk Etterretningsteneste 1945–1970
    (Oslo: Universitetsforlaget 1997) pp.96–101; Rolf Tamnes, The United States and the Cold
    War in the High North (Oslo: ad Notam 1991) p.75.
15. The best description of the abortive MI6–CIA operations in the Baltic is Tom Bower, The
    Red Web (London: Aurum Press 1989). For a description of the Gehlen Org infiltration
    operations in the Baltic States, see Heinz Hohne and Hermann Zolling, The General Was a
    Spy (NY: Coward, McCann & Geoghegan 1972) pp. 147–52. The KGB side of the story is
    told in History of the Soviet State Security Organs, 1977, pp.466, 473n, 481.
16. Sanche de Gramont, The Secret War (NY: Putnam’s 1962) pp. 184–8; Hohne and Zolling,
    The General Was a Spy (note 15) p. 153; Rositzke, The CIA’sSecret Operations (note 13)
    pp. 18–20; Rositzke, The KGB (note 13) pp.82–3; Christopher Simpson, Blowback (NY:
    Weidenfeld 1988) p.173; Bower, The Red Web (note 15) p.120; Burton Hersh, The Old
    Boys (NY: Scribner’s 1992) p.249; Evan Thomas, The Very Best Men (NY: Simon &
    Schuster 1995) p.36; Tom Bower, The Perfect English Spy (NY: St Martin’s Press 1995)
    pp.205–6; Michael Smith, New Cloak, Old Dagger (London: Gollancz 1996) pp. 114–15;
    Anthony Cavendish, Inside Intelligence: The Revelations of an MI6 Officer (London:
    HarperCollins 1997) p.51. For the KGB perspective, see History of the Soviet State
    Security Organs, 1977, p.473n.
17. Wilbur Crane Eveland, Ropes of Sand (NY: Norton 1980) p.263.
18. Bower, The Perfect English Spy (note 16) p.207.
19. Woodrow J. Kuhns, Assessing the Soviet Threat: The Early Cold War Years (Washington
    DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence 1998) p.7.
20. Bower, The Red Web (note 15) p. 165.
21. Peer de Silva, Sub Rosa: The CIA and the Uses of Intelligence (NY: Times Books 1978)
    p.84.
22. Smith, New Cloak, Old Dagger (note 16) p. 114.
23. Technological Capabilities Panel Report, Feb. 1955, p.145, Dwight D. Eisenhower
    Library, Abilene, Kansas.
24. William E. Burrows, Imaging Space Reconnaissance Operations During the Cold War:
    Cause, Effect and Legacy, undated, located at http://wbster.hibo.no/asf/Cold_War/reportl/
    williame.html.
25. SRH-277, A Lecture on Communication Intelligence by RADM E.E. Stone, DIRAFSA, 5
    June 1951, p.35, RG-457, NA, CP.
26. Included in the figure for the 37,000 Army COMINT personnel were approximately 17,000
    personnel assigned to dozens of tactical Comint collection units stationed overseas. SRH-
    277, A Lecture on Communications Intelligence (note 25) p.12.
27. Memo, Adjutant General to Commanding Generals, Establishment of the Army Security
    Agency, 6 Sept. 1945; Memo, Adjutant General to Chief, Military Intelligence Service,
    Establishment of the Army Security Agency, 19 Sept. 1945; Memo, Adjutant General to
56      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Commanding General, Army Service Forces, Transfer of Signal Security Agency to Army
    Security Agency, 21 Sept. 1945; Memo, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2 to Commanding
    Generals, Establishment of the Army Security Agency, 7 Nov. 1945; Memo for Record,
    General Provisions of the Army Security Agency, 17 May 1946, all in RG-165, Entry 421
    ABC Files, Box 269, File: ABC 350.05 (8 Dec. 1943), Sec. 1, NA, CP; John Patrick
    Finnegan, Military Intelligence: An Overview, 1885–1987, INSCOM History Office, Jan.
    1988, p.116, INSCOM FOIA.
28. SRH-355, Part II, pp.6, 11, RG-457, NA, CP; SRMN-084, The Evolution of the Navy’s
    Cryptologic Organization, p.9, RG-457, NA, CP.
29. ASA Summary Annual Report: FY 1946, p.7, INSCOM FOIA; ASA Summary Annual
    Report: FY 1947, Feb. 1950, p.2, INSCOM FOIA; Letter, Clayton to Patterson, 17 Sept.
    1946, RG-107, Entry 108, Patterson General Decimal File 1946–1947, Box 4, File: 311.5
    Communications, Crypto Security, NA, CP; Oral History, Arnold I. Dumey, 9 Oct. 1984,
    p.18, Charles Babbage Institute, Center for the History of Information Processing,
    University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
30. SRH-197, J.N. Wenger, Captain, USN, US Navy Communication Intelligence
    Organization, Liaison and Collaboration, 1941–1945, 8 Oct. 1945, Chart A, pp.7, 34, RG-
    457, NA, CP; SRMN-084, The Evolution of the Navy’s Cryptologic Organization, p.10,
    RG-457, NA, CP; OH, Arnold Dumey, 9 Oct. 1984, Charles Babbage Institute, Center for
    the History of Information Processing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
31. HQ USAF, AFOIR-SR 322, Functions of the USAF Security Service, 20 Oct. 1948, p.1,
    AIA FOIA; Dickey, pp.5–6; Insight, p.8; ‘35 Years of Excellence’, Spokesman, Oct. 1983,
    p.9.
32. Memo for USAF Deputy Chief of Staff/Operations from Major General CP. Cabell, USAF
    Director of Intelligence, Change in Personnel and Equipment Priorities for US Air Force
    Security Service, 14 Dec. 1949, RG-341, Entry 214, File 2-10500 – 2-10599, NA, CP;
    USAFSS, Organizational Development of the USAFSS, 1948–1962, 15 Feb. 1963, p.122,
    AIA FOIA.
33. JCS 2010/1, p.12; Memo, Secretary of Defense to Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air
    Force, Organization of Cryptologie Activities Within the National Military Establishment,
    20 May 1945, with attachment, RG-330, Entry 199 OSD 1947–1950, Box 97, CD 22-1-23,
    NA, CP; JCS 2010, Organization of Cryptologic Activities Within the National Military
    Establishment, 20 May 1949, p.l, RG-341, Entry 214, File 2-8100 – 2-8199, NA, CP.
34. Memo, Denfield to Secretary of Defense, 26 Oct. 1949, RG-330, Entry 199 OSD 1947–
     1950, Box 97, CD 22-1-23, NA, CP; JCS 2010/19, Expanded Requirements of the Armed
    Forces Security Agency in View of Current World Situation, dated 27 July 1950, RG-218,
    CCS 334 NSA, Section 4, NA, CP.
35. As of 30 June 1950, AFSA headquarters in Washington consisted of 4,500 personnel; ASA
    consisted of 6,380 military and civilian personnel; NSG of approximately 3,500 military
    and civilian personnel; and USAFSS had 3,232 military and civilian personnel. History,
    Army Security Agency and Subordinate Units, FY 1950, p.1, INSCOM FOIA; Headquarters
    USAF, United States Air Force Statistical Digest, Fiscal Year 1951, pp.426, 429, Decimal
    File K134.11-6, AFHRA, Maxwell AFB, AL; USAFSS, Organizational Development of
    the USAFSS, 1948–1962, 15 Feb. 1963, pp.130–1; USAFSS, Organizational Development
    of the USAFSS, 1948–1966, 1 Feb. 1967, p.71.
36. SRMA-011, SSS/SSA/ASA Staff Meeting Minutes, pp.293, 321, RG-457, NA, CP; ASA
    Summary Annual Report FY 1947, pp.22–3, INSCOM FOIA; Army-Navy Communication
    Intelligence Board Organizational Bulletin No. 1, June 1945, RG-457, HCC, Box 1364,
    NA, CP; Meilinger, p.71; NSA-OH-03-83, Oral History Interview with Earl E. Stone,
    RADM, USN (Ret.), 9 Feb. 1983, pp.34–5, NSA FOIA.
37. Christopher Andrew, For The President’s Eyes Only (NY: HarperCollins 1995) p.163;
    Nicky Hager, Secret Power (Nelson, NZ: Craig Potton 1996) pp.61–2; Christopher
    Andrew, ‘The Growth of the Australian Intelligence Community and the Anglo-American
    Connection’, Intelligence and National Security 4/2 (April 1989) p.224; Christopher
    Andrew, ‘The Making of the Anglo-American SIGINT Alliance’, p.106, and John
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                            57
    Ranelagh, ‘Through the Looking Glass: A Comparison of United States and United
    Kingdom Intelligence Cultures’, both in Hayden B. Peake and Samuel Halpern (eds.) In
    The Name of Intelligence: Essays in Honor of Walter Pforzheimer (Washington DC: NIBC
    Press 1994) pp.411, 435–6.
38. Gene Becker, ‘If Lou Tordella Says It’s OK, That’s Good Enough for Me’, Cryptolog,
    Spring 1996, pp.26–7.
39. Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood (NY: Random House 1998)
    pp.291–2; David Alvarez, ‘Behind Venona: American Signals Intelligence in the Early
    Cold War’, Intelligence and National Security 14/2 (Summer 1999) p.180.
40. National Cryptologic School, On Watch (Ft Meade: NSA/CSS, Sept. 1986) p.19, NSA
    FOIA.
41. War Diary Report OP-20-G-4A:1September to 1 October 1945, 1 Oct. 1945, p.3, RG-38,
    CNSG 5750/160, NA, CP; War Diary Summary of G4A for December 1945, 4 Jan. 1946,
    p.1, RG-38, CNSG 5750/160, NA, CP; War Diary Summary of G4A for March 1946, 9
    April 1946, p.1, RG-38, CNSG 5750/160, NA, CP; War Diary Summary of G4A for April
    1946, 6 May 1946, p.1, RG-38, CNSG 5750/160, NA, CP. The author is grateful to Ralph
    Erskine for making copies of these documents available. See also Alvarez, ‘Behind
    Venona’ (note 39) pp.181, 185n4.
42. Alvarez, ‘Behind Venona’ (note 39) p.180.
43. War Diary Summary of G4A for April 1946, 6 May 1946 (note 41) p.1; Alvarez, ‘Behind
    Venona’ (note 39) p.181.
44. Army Security Agency Summary Annual Report, FY 1948, p.68, and History, Army Security
    Agency and Subordinate Units, FY 1950, p.6, both INSCOM FOIA. For examples of
    RUMUA decrypts, see RUMI-0622, Riga to Moscow, RUMUA-1A, intercepted 28 Dec.
    1946, solved 12 Oct. 1948; RUMI-0625, Tbilisi to Moscow MVS, RUMUA-1, intercepted
    8 Jan. 1948, solved 12 Oct. 1948; RUMI-0705, Vienna to Mukachevo, RUMUA-1A,
    intercepted 3 Dec. 1947, solved 23 Dec. 1948; RUMI-0712, Vienna to Mukachevo,
    RUMUA-1A, intercepted 3 Dec. 1947, solved 23 Dec. 1948, all in RG-38, Box 2742, NA,
    CP.
45. See for example RUM-12083, Moscow VVS VS to Vienna 2nd Air Army, RUARA-1,
    intercepted 6 Oct. 1947, solved 20 Oct. 1948; RUM-12375, Dairen 7 Air Corps to
    Vozdvizhenka 9th Air Army, RUMUC-2, intercepted 1 Dec. 1947, solved UNK, all in RG-
    38, Box 2742, NA, CP; RUM-10828, Vozdvizhenka 9th Air Army to Moscow VVS VS,
    intercepted 4 May 1947, solved 6 Aug. 1948, RG-38, Box 2744, NA, CP; RUMI-0505,
    Tbilisi 11 Air Army to VVS VS, intercepted 30 April 1948, solved 31 Aug. 1948, RG-38,
    Box 2745, NA, CP.
46. Michael Haydock, The Cold War in Asia, VFW Magazine, located at www.asa.npoint.net/
    cldwarasia.htm.
47. Memo, Miscellaneous, undated but circa late 1945, RG-457, Historic Cryptologic
    Collection (HCC), Box 522, File: List of Russian Codes Captured by Finns, NA, CP.
48. For examples of Soviet Navy decrypts, see NI-1-#14928, CinC 5th Fleet to Moscow Naval
    Headquarters, RUNRA-1, intercepted 18 April 1948, solved 16 March 1949; NI-1-#23815,
    Vladivostok to Moscow, RUNY, intercepted 8 Dec. 1948, solved 21 April 1949; RUN-
     16971, Petropavlovsk Naval Base to Sovetskaya Gavan Naval Base, RUNRA-1,
    intercepted 16 Jan. 1948, solved 18 Nov. 1948, all in RG-38, Box 2739, NA, CP.
49. See for example, DA-76354, Belgrade to Athens, Greek, intercepted 21 Oct. 1948, solved
     1 Nov. 1948, RG-38, Box 2741, NA, CP; DA-96549, Warsaw to Ankara, Turkish,
    intercepted 18 Feb. 1949, solved 15 March 1949; ZA-1716, Sofia to Rome, Italian,
    intercepted 24 Sept. 1948, solved 16 Dec. 1948; ZA-2335, Bucharest to Rome, Italian,
     intercepted 27 Dec. 1948, solved 28 Feb. 1949; DN-69432, Prague to Nanking, Chinese,
     intercepted 11 Sept. 1948, solved 21 Sept. 1948, all in RG-38, Box 2744, NA, CP.
50. National Cryptologie School, On Watch (Ft Meade: NSA/CSS, Sept. 1986) p.19, NSA
    FOIA; TI Item #137, NT-1 Traffic Intelligence, Unprecedented Coordinated Russian
     Communications Changes, 4 Nov. 1948, RG-38, Box 2742, NA, CP; Weinstein and
    Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood (note 39) pp.291–3.
58      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

51. Annual Report for G-3 ASA FY 1951, p.76, INSCOM FOIA; Agenda Prepared by Army
     Field Forces Observer Team No. 5, Aug. 1951, p.167, MISC 333 AFF-FECOM, OCMH,
     Washington DC; Memo for the NSA/CSS Representative Defense, NSA Transition Book
     for the Department of Defense, 9 Dec. 1992, p.2. The author is grateful to Dr Jeffrey T.
      Richelson for making a copy of this document available.
52. Ludwell Lee Montague, General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of Central Intelligence,
      October 1950-February 1953, Dec. 1971, Vol. V, p.54, RG-263, NA, CP; Memo for
      Executive Secretary, National Security Council from Walter B. Smith, Director of Central
      Intelligence, Proposed Survey of Communications Intelligence Activities, 10 Dec. 1951;
      AHR Army Security Agency FY 1953, p.14, INSCOM FOIA.
53. Memo, President Truman to Secretaries of State and Defense, 24 Oct. 1952, pp.1–4, SRH-
      271, Presidential Memorandum on Communications Intelligence Activities, RG-457, NA,
      CP; History of the Army Security Agency and Subordinate Units: Fiscal Year 1953, Vol. I,
      pp.3–4, INSCOM FOIA; National Security Agency Organization Manual, 19 April 1954,
      Chapter III, p.1, NSA FOIA.
54. Confidential interview.
55. As of 22 Jan. 1963, there were assigned to NSA Headquarters at Ft George G. Meade 718
      officers, 1,726 enlisted men and 7,475 civilian personnel, with another 82 officers, 78
      enlisted men and 405 civilians attached to NSA for ‘support’. US House of
      Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Military Construction Appropriations for
      1964, Part 2, p.487. The 10,000 figure at Ft Meade in the early 1960s is confirmed by the
      former Assistant Chief of NSA for Production, Army Major General John Davis, in Senior
      Officers Oral History Program, Oral History, Lt. General John J. Davis, USA (Ret.), 1986,
      p.136, OCMH, Washington DC. For additional data on the size of NSA, see JCS 2010/104,
      General Guidelines for FY 1956 and 1957, and NSA Civilian Manpower and Space
      Requirements, 29 Nov. 1955, RG-341, Entry 355, OPD 311, Section 9, Box 107, NA, CP;
      Report of the President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities to the
      President, 20 Dec. 1956, p.7, DDRS 1992 #0487; John C. Schmidt, ‘America’s Supersecret
      Watchdog’, The Baltimore Sun, 8 Jan. 1961, p.A1.
56. ‘CRYPTOLOG Interviews NSA Employee Gene Becker’, Cryptolog, Spring 1996, p.19.
 57. SRH-123, The Brownell Committee Report, pp.24–5, RG-457, NA, CP.
58. TS Control #55-040, Supplement to Part II of the Report of the Technological Capabilities
      Panel, Feb. 1955, p.2. The author is grateful to Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson for a copy of this
       document.
 59. SRH-123, Brownell Committee Report, pp.29, 135-6, RG-457, NA, CP; SRH-277, A
       Lecture on Communications Intelligence by Rear Admiral E.E. Stone, DIRAFSA, 5 June
       1951, p.34, RG-457, NA, CP.
 60. National Cryptologic School, On Watch (Ft Meade: NSA/CSS, Sept. 1986) p.20, NSA
       FOIA.
 61. Michael van der Meulen, ‘German Air Force Signal Intelligence 1956: A Museum of
       Comint and Sigint’, Cryptologia, July 1999, p.242.
 62. Jerry Mooney Deposition, p.239, RG-46, Records of the US Senate, Select Committee on
       POW/MIA Affairs, Depositions Box 14, NA, Washington DC. See also the William F.
       Friedman Catalog, 5 Sept. 1957, RG-457, Yardley Collection, Box 2, Document 21, NA,
       CP for indications of NSA’s cryptanalytic work in the mid-1950s against Soviet high-level
       systems.
 63. SNIE 11-6-57, Soviet Gross Capabilities for Attack on the Continental US in Mid-1960s,
      pp.5-6, RG-263, NA, CP; SNIE 11-7-58, Strength and Composition of the Soviet Long
      Range Bomber Force, p.3, RG-263, NA, CP; NIE 11-8-59, Soviet Capabilities for Strategic
      Attack Through Mid-1964, p.27, RG-263, NA, CP; NIE 11-8-61, Annex C (Top Secret
       Codeword), RG-263, Entry 37, Box 2, Folder 22, NA, CP; K.F. Spielmann Jr, The
      Evolution of Soviet Strategic Command and Control and Warning: 1945–72, Institute for
       Defense Analysis, May 1975, pp.49, 121–2,126–31, partially declassified and on file at the
      National Security Archives, Washington DC; Scott D. Breckinridge, The CIA and the Cold
       War: A Memoir (Westport, CT: Praeger 1993) pp.52–3; Riste and Moland, Strengt
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                                 59
    Hemmelig (note 14) pp. 133–4; R. Cargill Hall, ‘The Truth About Overflights’, Military
    History Quarterly (Spring 1997) p.31.
64. Charles A. Kroger Jr, ‘ELINT: A Scientific Intelligence System’, Studies in Intelligence
    (Winter 1958) p.77, RG-263, Entry 37, Box 1, Folder 6, NA, CP; ‘Electronic Intercept or
    Technical Search Operations: History and Importance’, ONI Review, April 1959,
    pp. 149–50, Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Washington DC.
65. Memo Approval No. 1400 (NSCID No. 17, Action #1400), RG-273, NA, CP; NSCID No.
     17, Electronic Intelligence (ELINT), 16 May 1955, RG-263, HRP 89-2/00286, Box 4, File:
    NSCIDs, NA, CP; Kroger, ‘ELINT’ (note 64) pp.77–8, RG-263, Entry 27, Box 1, NA, CP;
    CIA Historical Staff, Dulles as DCI, Vol. II, pp.85–6, RG-263, NA, CP;JCS 990852, JCS
    to USCINCEUR PARIS FRANCE, 24 Oct. 1955, RG-218, CCS 334 NSA, Section 16, NA,
    CP; JIC 463/93, Note by the Secretaries to the Joint Intelligence Committee on Revision of
    JCS 222/44, 16 May 1956, pp.4–5, RG-218, CCS 334 JIC, Sec 8, Box 58, NA, CP;
    National Security Agency/Central Security Service, NSA/CSS Manual 22-1, NSA
    Organizational Manual, 21 Oct. 1986, p.2, NSA FOIA; O.D. Dickey, The Development of
    the US Elint Effort, undated, p.3, AIA FOIA; The Implementation and Expansion of the
    USAF Electronics Intelligence Program, p.21, AIA FOIA.
66. Letter, Ackerman to Fressanges, 21 April 1953, RG-341, Entry 214, File 3-1644, NA, CP;
    Reconnaissance, pp.1–2, and Soviet Air Defense Capabilities, circa 1954, pp.7–8, both in
    RG-341, Entry 337, Box 30, File: WPC 54-1, Intelligence Annex, Vol. I, NA, CP;
    Gregory W. Pedlow and Donald E. Welzenbach, The Central Intelligence Agency
    and Overhead Reconnaissance: The U-2 and OXCART Programs, 1954–1974, April
    1992, pp.87, 101, 106, declassified by the CIA in Sept. 1998; Alfred Price, The History
    of US Electronic Warfare: Vol. III: Rolling Thunder Through Allied Force, 1964 to
    2000 (Washington DC: Association of Old Crows 2000) p.2; Scott D. Breckinridge, The
    CIA and the US Intelligence System (Boulder, CO: Westview Press 1986) pp. 132–3;
    Chris Pocock, Dragon Lady: The History of the U-2 Spyplane (Osceola: Motorbooks
    International 1989) p.35; Chris Pocock, ‘From Peshawar to Bodo: Mission Impossible?’,
    in Svein Lundestad, U-2 Flights and the Cold War in the High North (Bodo: Bodo
    College 1995) pp.4–5; Riste and Moland, Strengt Hemmelig (note 14) pp. 104–5;
    Cargill Hall, ‘The Truth About Overflights’ (note 63) pp.32–3; David Colley, ‘Shadow
    Warriors: Intelligence Operatives Waged Clandestine Cold War’, VFW Magazine, Sept.
    1997.
67. Letter from Ronald D. Schultz, undated, in 1st Radio Squadron Mobile Updates, located at
    http://www.bobnfumi.com/1radioupdate.html.
68. Memo, Willems to Director of Central Intelligence with enclosures, 15 Sept. 1953, RG-59,
    Entry 1498, Box 3, File: Sheldon Committee 1953, NA, CP; Breckinridge, The CIA (note
    66) pp.131–2; Breckinridge, CIA and the Cold War (note 63) p.72; Paul Bracken, The
    Command and Control of Nuclear Forces (New Haven: Yale UP 1983) pp.10, 30; Riste and
    Moland, Strengt Hemmelig (note 14) pp. 148–9, 243, 247–8; Rolf Tamnes, The United
    States and the Cold War in the High North (Oslo: Ad Notam forlag 1991) p.122.
69. Memo, Ackerman to Control Division, USAF DCS Operations, Precedence of Units of the
    USAF Security Service, 2 Nov. 1951, RG-341, Entry 214, Box 60, File 2-21300 – 2-21399,
    NA, CP; Memo, Willems to Director of Central Intelligence, et al. with enclosures, 15
    Sept. 1953, RG-59, Entry 1498, Box 3, File: Sheldon Committee 1953, NA, CP; NIE 11-
    57, Sino-Soviet Air Defense Capabilities Through Mid-1962, 16 July 1957, p.10, RG-263,
    Entry 37, Box 7, NA, CP; Patrick J. McGarvey, CIA: The Myth and the Madness (NY:
    Saturday Review Press 1972) pp.42–3, 74–6; Patrick J. McGarvey, Communist Military
    Strength in Asia: 1956, undated, at www.netrox.net/-condev/203mcg10.htm; Breckinridge,
    The CIA and the US Intelligence System (note 66) p.131; idem CIA and the Cold War (note
    63) p.72; Andrew, For The President’s Eyes Only (note 14) p.219; Tony Geraghty,
    BRIXMIS (London: HarperCollins 1997) p.87; Riste and Moland, Strengt Hemmelig (note
    14) pp. 104–5, 133; William E. Burrows, ‘Beyond The Iron Curtain’, Air & Space,
    Aug./Sept. 1994, p.31.
70. Tamnes, The United States and the Cold War in the High North (note 14) p.122; Sherry
60      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Sontag and Christopher Drew, Blind Man’s Bluff (NY: Public Affairs 1998) pp.25–39;
    Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen, Spy Book: The Encyclopedia of Espionage (NY:
    Random House 1997) p.539; David Colley, ‘Stealth Beneath the Sea: The Wet Cold War’,
    VFW Magazine, Aug. 1997.
71. SRH-123, Brownell Committee Report, p.29, RG-457, NA, CP; Memo for Record, 24 Aug.
    1950, RG-341, Entry 214, File: 2-15900 – 2-15999, NA, CP; Memo, Willems to Director
    of Central Intelligence, et al. with enclosures, 15 Sept. 1953, RG-59, Entry 1498, Box 3,
    File: Sheldon Committee 1953, NA, CP; NIE 11-6-55, Probable Intelligence Warning of
    Soviet Attack on the US Through Mid-1958, 1 July 1955, p.8, RG-263, NA, CP;
    Supplement to Part II of the Report of the Technological Capabilities Panel, Feb. 1955, p.2,
    via Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson; Sanche de Gramont, The Secret War (NY: Putnam’s 1962)
    p.168; Breckinridge, The CIA (note 66) pp.131–2; Breckinridge, CIA and the Cold War
    (note 63) p.72; Paul Bracken, The Command and Control of Nuclear Forces (New Haven,
    CT: Yale UP 1983) pp.10, 30.
72. James E. Pierson, USAFSS Response to World Crises, 1949–1969 (San Antonio, TX:
    USAFSS Historical Office, 22 April 1970) p.1, AIA FOIA; SRH-123, The Brownell
    Committee Report, p.29, RG-457, NA, CP.
73. GHQ Far East Command, G-3 Section, A Study of the Current Situation in the Far East
    Command, 17 June 1950, p.47, RG-6, Box 105, MacArthur Library (hereafter ‘MACL’),
    Norfolk, Virginia.
74. USAFSS Response to World Crises, p.1, AIA FOIA; Department of Defense, Soviet
    Military Power (Washington DC: GPO, April 1984) p.10; Msg, G-2, Chinese Nationalist
    Ministry of National Defense (via Chinese Mission, Tokyo) to FECOM G-2 Foreign
    Liaison Branch, 3 July 1950, RG-6, Box 14, MACL.
75. David Colley, ‘Shadow Warriors: Intelligence Operatives Waged Clandestine Cold War’,
    VFW Magazine, Sept. 1997.
76. On the general importance of Sigint during the 1950s and 1960s, see Oral History of
    Laurence H. Frost, pp.7–8, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, Massachusetts;
    Victor Marchetti and John D. Marks, The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence (NY: Laurel
    Books 1980) p.22; Bracken, Command and Control of Nuclear Forces (note 71) p.13;
    Patrick Fitzgerald and Mark Leopold, Stranger on the Line: The Secret History of Phone
    Tapping (London: Bodley Head 1987) p.46; and Dino A. Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball: The
    Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis (NY: Random House 1990) pp.6–7. For Sigint and
    U-2 Imint providing 75 per cent of intelligence of information about the Soviet Union, see
    Gene Poteat, ‘Stealth, Countermeasures, and Elint, 1960–1975’, Studies in Intelligence
    MIX (1998) p.52, CIA FOIA; Pedlow and Welzenbach, The Central Intelligence Agency
    and Overhead Reconnaissance: The U-2 and OXCART Programs (note 66) pp.100ff,
    declassified by the CIA in Sept. 1998.
77. Philip K. Edwards, ‘The President’s Board: 1956–60’, Studies in Intelligence 13/2
    (Summer 1969) pp. 117–18, RG-263, Box 16, NA, CP; The Joint Study Group Report on
    Foreign Intelligence Activities of the United States Government, 15 Dec. 1960, p.48,
    Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas; Lt. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe, USAF (Ret.),
     ‘Imagery and Reconnaissance: Reminiscences’, American Intelligence Journal,
    Winter/Spring 1992, p.84.
78. Of the 206 Russian spies identified by the FBI, by 1955 101 had left the US and could not
    be prosecuted, including 61 Russian officials; 11 had died; 14 were cooperating with the
    FBI; and 15 had been prosecuted. These individuals were Abraham Brothman, Judith
    Coplon, Klaus Fuchs, Harry Gold, David Greenglass, Valentine A. Gubitchev (Judith
    Coplon’s KGB handler), Miriam Moskowitz, Julius Rosenberg, Ethel Rosenberg, Alfred
    Slack, Morton Sobell, Jack Soble, Myra Soble, William Perl, and Alger Hiss. This left 77
    individuals whom the FBI had investigated but the US Justice Department could not or
    would not prosecute for various reasons. Memo, Belmont to Boardman, 27 Nov. 1957,
    pp.2–3, FBI Venona Files.
79. Confidential interviews.
80. Woodrow J. Kuhns (ed.) Assessing the Soviet Threat: The Early Cold War Years
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                               61
    (Washington DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence 1997) p.11 fn39; CIA, IM-323-SRC,
    Soviet Preparations for Major Hostilities in 1950, 25 Aug. 1950, Intelligence File,
    President’s Secretary’s File, Box 250, Harry S. Truman Papers, Truman Library,
    Independence, Missouri.
81. Melvin Beck, Secret Contenders (NY: Sheridan Square 1984) pp.43–4.
82. NSA OH 76-1, Oral History, Frank B. Rowlett, 1976, p.374, NSA FOIA; Oral History,
    Richard Drain, 8 Jan. 1976, p.62, CIA FOIA; Victor Marchetti and John D. Marks, The
    CIA and the Cult of Intelligence (NY: Laurel Books 1974) pp.164, 170–1; Philip Agee,
    Inside the Company: CIA Diary (NY: Bantam Books 1976) p.33; Joseph Burkholder
    Smith, Portrait of a Cold Warrior (NY: Putnam’s 1976) p.397; David Martin, Wilderness
    of Mirrors (NY: Harper & Row 1980) p.121; Melvin Beck, Secret Contenders (note 81)
    pp.69, 72; Peter Wright, Spycatcher (NY: Viking 1987) pp.145, 148, 151; David E.
    Murphy, Sergei A. Kondrashev and George Bailey, Battleground Berlin (New Haven, CT:
    Yale UP 1997) p.209; Riste and Moland, Strengt Hemmelig (note 14) pp. 134–5; Nigel
    West, Venona: The Greatest Secret of the Cold War (London: HarperCollins 1999)
    pp.34–5.
83. US Senate, Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to
    Intelligence Activities, Final Report, 94th Congress, 2nd Session, 1976, Book III, p.359;
    William C. Sullivan, The Bureau (NY: Norton 1979) pp. 179–80; G. Gordon Liddy, Will
    (NY: St Martin’s Press 1996) pp.78-9; Anthony Marro, ‘FBI Break-In Policy’, in Athan
    Theoharis (ed.) Beyond the Hiss Case: The FBI, Congress and the Cold War (Philadelphia:
    Temple UP 1982) p.103; Andrew, For The President’s Eyes Only (note 37) pp.217–18.
84. George Blake, No Other Choice (NY: Simon & Schuster 1990) pp.6, 10–12; Michael
    Smith, New Cloak, Old Dagger (London: Gollancz 1996) p.116.
85. Wright, Spycatcher (note 82) pp.79–80.
86. Donald P. Steury (ed.) On the Front Lines of the Cold War: Documents on the Intelligence
    War in Berlin, 1946 to 1961 (Washington DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence 1999)
    pp.401–5; Murphy, Kondrashev and Bailey, Battleground Berlin (note 82) pp.423–8.
87. For the 95,000 personnel figure, see US House of Representatives, Committee on
    Appropriations, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1975, 93rd Congress, 2nd
    Session, 1974, Part 1, p.598. For NSA personnel at Ft Meade, see US House of
    Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Department of Defense Appropriations for
    1972, 92nd Congress, 1st Session, 1971, Part 3, p.536; US House of Representatives,
    Committee on Appropriations, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1975, 93rd
    Congress, 2nd Session, 1974, Part 3, pp.340, 663.
88. Tom Mangold, Cold Warrior (NY: Simon & Schuster 1991) p.264.
89. Report to the President’sForeign Intelligence Advisory Board on Intelligence Community
    Activities Relating to the Cuban Arms Build-Up: 14 April through 14 October 1962,
    undated, p.27, National Security Files: Countries: Cuba, Box 61, Kennedy Library, Boston,
    Massachusetts.
90. Nigel West, Games of Intelligence (NY: Crown Publishers 1989) p.136.
91. Walter Laqueur, A World of Secrets (NY: Basic Books 1985) p.24.
92. The Joint Study Group Report on Foreign Intelligence Activities of the United States
    Government, 15 Dec. 1960, p.48, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas; US
    Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Department of Defense Authorization for
    Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1994 and the Future Years Defense Program, 103rd
    Congress, 1st Session, 1993, Part 7, pp.452, 462; John L. McLucas, ‘The US Space
    Program Since 1961: A Personal Assessment’, in R. Cargill Hall and Jacob Neufeld (eds.)
    The US Air Force in Space: 1945 to the Twenty-first Century (Washington DC: USAF
    History and Museums Program 1998) pp.85–6.
93. The Joint Study Group Report on Foreign Intelligence Activities of the United States
    Government, 15 Dec. 1960, p.47, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas.
94. For Sigint detections of the unusual surge in Soviet shipping traffic to Cuba, see Msg,
    Unusual Number of Soviet Passenger Ships En Route to Cuba, 24 July 1962, Msg, Possible
    Reflections of Soviet/Cuban Trade Adjustments Noted in Merchant Shipping, 31 July 1962,
62        SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

      Msg, Further Unusual Soviet/Cuban Trade Relations Recently Noted, 7 Aug. 1962, Msg,
      Status of Soviet Merchant Shipping to Cuba, 23 Aug. 1962, and Msg, Further Information
      on Soviet/Cuban Trade, 31 Aug. 1962, all located at www.nsa.gov/.
 95. US Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Authorization for Military Procurement,
      Research and Development, FY 1969, 90th Congress, 2nd Session (Washington DC: GPO
       1968) p.42; US House of Representatives, Committee on Armed Services, Hearings Before
      the Special Subcommittee on the USS. Pueblo: Inquiry into the USS. Pueblo and EC-121
      Incidents, 91st Congress, 1st Session (Washington DC: GPO 1969) p.635; Laqueur (note
      91) pp.165–7; Bouchard, Vol. II, p.519.
 96. ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, pp.43–4; Chet Flippo, ‘Can
      the CIA Turn Students Into Spies?’, Rolling Stone, 11 March 1976, p.30.
 97. HQ USASA, Historical Summary of the US Army Security Agency, FY 1968 – 1970,
      pp.73–4, INSCOM FOIA; CIA: The Pike Report (London: Spokesman Books 1977)
      pp. 139–40; James H. Polk, ‘Reflections on the Czechoslovakian Invasion, 1968’, Strategic
      Review 5/5, pp.31–2; ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.43.
 98. History of the Collection Research Division, USAF ACS1: 1 January – 30 June 1969,
      pp.50–1, USAF FOIA; Henry Kissinger, The White House Years (Boston: Little Brown
       1979) pp. 183–4; Patrick Tyler, A Great Wall: Six Presidents and China (NY: Century
      Foundation Books 1999) pp.65, 68.
 99. Seymour Hersh, ‘Was Castro Out of Control in 1962?’ The Washington Post, 11 Oct. 1987,
      pp.H1–H2.
100. Seymour M. Hersh, The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House (NY: Summit
      Books 1983) pp.257n, 526n.
101. Jerry Mooney Deposition, pp.238–9, RG-46, Records of the US Senate, Select Committee
      on POW/MIA Affairs, Depositions Box 14, NA, Washington DC.
102. George C. Herring (ed.) The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating
      Volumes of the Pentagon Papers (Austin: U. of Texas Press nd) pp.61–2.
103. ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, pp.43–4; Chet Flippo, ‘Can
      the CIA Turn Students Into Spies?’, Rolling Stone, 11 March 1976, p.30.
104. See for example, Document 122, Current Intelligence Weekly Report, 5 Oct. 1961, in
      Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States 1961–1963: Volume 5, Soviet
      Union (Washington DC: GPO 1998); and NSA Report, 25 Nov. 1963, JFK Assassination
      Records, NSA, Box 1, Record No. 144-10001-10056, NA, CP. For Teufelsberg Sigint
      successes, see Markus Wolf, Man Without a Face (NY: Times Books 1997) p.294; Klaus
      Eichner and Dr Andreas Dobbert, Headquarters Germany (Berlin: Edition Ost 1997)
      pp.225–7; Geraghty, BRIXMIS (note 69) pp.204–5.
105. ‘HQ, US Army Security Agency, Europe (TAREX), Frankfurt am Main, West Germany:
      The End of My Army Career’, undated, located at www.cdstrand.com/areas/usasaeur.htm.
106. Albert D. Wheelon and Sidney N. Graybeal, ‘Intelligence for the Space Race’, Studies in
      Intelligence 5/3 (Fall 1961) p.4; David S. Brandwein, ‘Telemetry Analysis’, ibid. 8/3 (Fall
      1964) pp.28–9, both in RG-263, NA, CP.
107. Confidential interviews. See also US Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Department
      of Defense Authorization for Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1994, 103rd Congress, 1st
      Session, 1993, Part 7, pp.452, 456.
108. Frank Eliot, ‘Moon Bounce Elint’, Studies in Intelligence 11/1 (Spring 1967) pp.63–4, RG-
      263, Entry 27, NA, CP; Edward Tauss, ‘Foretesting a Soviet ABM System’, ibid. 12/4
      (Winter 1968) pp.22–3, RG-263, Entry 27, NA, CP; David S. Brandwein, ‘Interaction in
      Weapons R&D’, ibid. (Winter 1968) pp.18–19, RG-263, Entry 27, NA, CP; Donald C.
      Brown, ‘On The Trail of Hen House and Hen Roost’, ibid. 13/1 (Spring 1969) pp. 11–19,
      RG-263, Entry 27, Box 16, NA, CP; Gene Poteat, ‘Stealth, Countermeasures, and Elint,
      1960–1975’, Studies in Intelligence MIX (1998) pp.53–4, 57–8, all located in RG-263, NA,
      CP.
109. OPNAVINST S3270.1, Employment and Operating Policy for the US Navy HFDF Nets,
      18 May 1984, pp.2–4, Navy FOIA; OPNAVINST 02501.5E, Cryptologic Tasks Assigned
      to Fleet Commanders in Chief, 24 June 1969, p.3, Navy FOIA; NSGINST C3270.2,
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                                  63
      Bullseye System Concept of Operations, 30 June 1989, p.3, via Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson;
      NWP-5, Naval Cryptologic Operations, pp.3-3–3-4, Navy FOIA; 1984 Annual History
      Report for the Headquarters Naval Security Group Command, 5 June 1985, Section 10,
      Item 10.2.1, COMNAVSECGRU FOIA; Desmond Ball, ‘The US Naval Ocean
      Surveillance Information System – Australia’s Role’, Pacific Defence Reporter, June 1982,
      pp.45–6.
110. Patrick E. Tyler, ‘Laxness Cited At U.K. Spy Agency’, Manchester Guardian Weekly, 10
      Nov. 1985, p.15.
111. ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.41.
112. SNIE 11-13-68, US Intelligence Capabilities to Monitor Certain Limitations on Soviet
      Strategic Weapons Programs, 18 July 1968, p.5, RG-263, NA, CP.
113. HQ USASA, Historical Summary of the US Army Security Agency, Fiscal Years 1968 –
      1970, p.61, INSCOM FOIA; US Senate, Final Report of the Select Committee to Study
      Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, 1975, Book I, p.27;
      General Bruce Palmer Jr, The 25-Year War: America’s Military Role in Vietnam,
      (Lexington:U. Press of Kentucky 1984) pp.63, 167.
114. According to one source, in 1980 NSA consisted of 40,000 personnel, for which see Bob
      Woodward, Veil (NY: Simon and Schuster 1987) p.71. Another report indicated that in
       1980 NSA had a total manpower strength of 30,000, for which see Commission on the
      Roles and Capabilities of the United States Intelligence Community, Preparing for the 21st
       Century: An Appraisal of US Intelligence (Washington DC: GPO 1996) pp.96, 132. For
      personnel at Ft Meade, see US House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations,
      Military Construction Appropriations for 1981, Part 1, p.474.
115. ‘CRYPTOLOG Interviews NSA Employee Gene Becker’, Cryptolog, Spring 1996, p.19.
116. In Nov. 1982, Prime pleaded guilty to charges of spying for the Russians and was sentenced
      to 35 years in prison. Mark Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (London: Faber 1996) p.6; Philip
      Taubman, ‘US Aides Say British Spy Gave Soviet Key Data’, New York Times, 24 Oct.
       1982, pp.1, 15.
117. Report of the Commission on the Organization of the Government for the Conduct of
       Foreign Policy (Washington DC: GPO, June 1975), Vol. 7, p.26; Marchetti and Marks, The
       CIA and the Cult of Intelligence (note 82) p.168; ‘Eavesdropping on the World’s Secrets’,
       US News & World Report, 26 June 1978, p.45.
118. Intelligence Community Experiment in Competitive Analysis: Soviet Strategic Objectives:
       An Alternative View: Report of Team‘B’,Dec. 1976, p.9, RG-263, NA, CP.
119. Report of the Defense Panel on Intelligence, 1975, p.8, declassified and on file at the
       National Security Archives, Washington DC; Report of the Commission on the
       Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy (Washington DC: GPO,
       June 1975), Vol. 7, p.26.
 120. Loch K. Johnson, Secret Agencies: US Intelligence in a Hostile World (New Haven, CT:
       Yale UP 1996) p.178.
 121. William Drozdiak, ‘A Suspicious Eye on US “Big Ears”: Europeans Fear Listening Posts
       Eavesdrop on Their Businesses’, Washington Post, 24 July 2000, p.A1.
 122. Anthony Kenden, ‘US Military Satellites’, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
       Feb. 1985, p.64; Christopher Anson Pike, ‘Canyon, Rhyolite and Aquacade: US Signals
       Intelligence Satellites in the 1970s’, Spaceflight, #37, 11 Nov. 1995, p.381; Jonathan
       McDowell, ‘US Reconnaissance Satellite Programs, Part 2: Beyond Imaging’, Quest 4/4,
       pp.41–2.
 123. Confidential interview.
 124. The Sigint intercept in question was a transcript of a radio-telephone conversation
       between General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev and Defense Minister Marshal Andrei
       Grechko on the last day of a summit meeting with President Nixon before the signing of
       the SALT I Treaty. During the conversation, Grechko assured Brezhnev that the huge SS-
        19 ICBM, which had begun test firings at Tyuratam in March 1972, could be placed inside
       the existing SS-11 ICBM silos, thus bypassing the provision of Article II of the SALT I
       Treaty, which limited increases in silo dimensions to 15 per cent. According to publicly
64       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     available information, American negotiators ‘maneuvered with it [the Sigint intercepts] so
     effectively that they came home with the agreement not to build an antiballistic missile
     defense system’. Hersh, The Price of Power (note 100) p.547; David Kahn, ‘Big Ear or
     Big Brother?’, New York Times Magazine, 16 May 1976, p.62; ‘Eavesdropping on the
     World’s Secrets’, US News & World Report, 26 June 1978, p.47; Walter Andrews,
     ‘Kissinger Allegedly Withheld Soviet Plan to Violate SALT I’, Washington Times, 6 April
      1984, p.1; Bill Gertz, ‘CIA Upset Because Perle Detailed Eavesdropping’, Washington
     Times, 19 April 1987, p.2A.
125. US House of Representatives, Select Committee on Intelligence, US Intelligence Agencies
     and Activities: The Performance of the Intelligence Community, 94th Congress, 1st
     Session, 1975, Part 2, pp.658–9, 680–1; US Senate, Final Report of the Select Committee
     to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, 94th Congress,
     2nd Session, 1976, Book I, p.85; CIA: The Pike Report (London: Spokesman Books 1977)
     pp.141, 143, 147; ‘Eavesdropping on the World’s Secrets’, US News & World Report, 26
     June 1978, p.47.
126. CINCPACFLTINST S3251.1B, CLASSIC WIZARD Reporting System, 16 Dec. 1983,
     CINCPACFLT FOIA; Hugh Lanning and Richard Norton-Taylor, A Conflict of Loyalties:
     GCHQ 1984–1991 (Cheltenham: New Clarion Press 1991) p.51; ‘U.S. Electronic
     Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.41; Nicholas Daniloff, ‘How We Spy on
     the Russians’, Washington Post Magazine, 9 Dec. 1979, p.24; Duncan Campbell, ‘How We
     Spy on Argentina’, New Statesman, 30 Apri 1982, p.5; George C. Wilson, ‘Soviet Nuclear
     Sub Reported Sunk’, Washington Post, 11 Aug. 1983, p.A9; Tyler, ‘Laxness Cited At U.K.
     Spy Agency’ (note 110); ‘3 Soviet Submarines Said to Patrol Atlantic Box’, New York
     Times, 6 Oct. 1986, p.A6.
127. Lanning and Norton-Taylor, A Conflict of Loyalties (note 126) pp.63–4; Willis C.
     Armstrong et al., ‘The Hazards of Single-Outcome Forecasting’, in H. Bradford
     Westerfield (ed.) Inside the CIA’sPrivate World (New Haven, CT: Yale UP 1995) p.254;
     Robert M. Gates, From the Shadows (NY: Simon & Schuster 1996) p.133.
128. Jack Anderson, ‘Project Aquarium: Tapping the Tappers’, Washington Post, 2 Dec. 1980,
     p.B15.
129. For the 75,000 NSA personnel figure, see Declaration of Dr Richard W. Gronet, Director
     of Policy, National Security Agency, 14 June 1989, p.5, in CIV. No. HM87-1564, Ray
     Lindsey v. National Security Agency/Central Security Service, US District Court for the
     District of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland.
130. Memo, Vice Admiral Bobby R. Inman, USN to Special Assistant, Office of the Secretary
     of Defense, Transition Coordination, 9 Dec. 1980, Section VIII, Modernization Objectives,
     NSA FOIA; Angelo Codevilla, Informing Statecraft: Intelligence for a New Century (NY:
     The Free Press 1992) p.124.
131. Johnson, Secret Agencies (note 120) p.21.
132. Bob Drogin, ‘NSA Blackout Reveals Downside of Secrecy’, Los Angeles Times, 13 March
     2000, p.A1.
133. Col. Lori M. Sadler, USMC, ‘Improving National Intelligence Support to Marine Corps
     Expeditionary Forces’, American Intelligence Journal, Summer 1992, p.51.
134. Confidential interviews.
135. Among the successes enjoyed by NSA during the 1980s outside of the Soviet Union was
     the role Sigint played in the following crises: Aug. 1981 Gulf of Sidra incident with Libya;
     the covert war fought against Nicaragua and El Salvadoran insurgents during the early to
     mid-1980s; the bloody intervention in Lebanon from 1982 to 1984; the Sept. 1983
     shootdown of Korean Airlines Flight 007 off Sakhalin Island; the American invasion of
     Grenada in Oct.-Nov. 1983; the Achille Lauro incident of Oct. 1985; the bombing of the
     La Belle Disco in Berlin and the resulting American air strikes against Libya in
     March–April 1986; and the American invasion of Panama in Dec. 1989.
136. Mark Kramer, ‘In Case Military Assistance Is Provided to Poland: Soviet Preparations for
     Military Contingencies, August 1980’, Cold War International History Project Bulletin,
     No. 11, Winter 1998, p.104; Confidential interviews.
THE NSA AND THE COLD WAR                                                                 65
137. Jeffrey T. Richelson, A Century of Spies (NY: Oxford UP 1995) p.386; Andrew, For the
      President’sEyes Only (note 37) p.475.
138. ‘The World According to Oliver North’, Washington Post, 21 Dec. 1986, p.D1.
139. Major A. Andronov, ‘American Geosynchrenous Sigint Satellites’, Zarubezhnoye
      Voyennoye Obozreniye, No. 12, 1993, pp.37–43.
140. Jeffrey T. Richelson, The US Intelligence Community – Third Edition (Boulder, CO:
      Westview Press 1995) pp.172, 179; Jeffrey T. Richelson, America’s Space Sentinels: DSP
      Satellites and National Security (Lawrence: UP of Kansas 1999) p.153; ‘Soviet Missile-
      Motor Plant Shut By Explosion, Pentagon Says’, Washington Post, 18 May 1988, p.A29;
      Peter Almond and Paul Bedard, ‘Explosion Deals Serious Setback to New Soviet ICBMs’,
      Washington Times, 18 May 1988, p.A1; Andronov, ‘American Geosynchrenous Sigint
      Satellites’ (note 140) pp.37–43.
141. Count de Marenches and Christine Ockrent, The Evil Empire: The Third World War Now
      (London: Sidgwick & Jackson 1988) pp.99, 101; Tim Weiner, Blank Check: The
      Pentagon’s Black Budget (NY: Warner Books 1990) p.153; Mohammad Yousaf and Mark
      Adkin, The Bear Trap (London: Leo Cooper 1992) p.94; John K. Cooley, Unholy Wars
      (London: Pluto Press 1999) pp.96–7, 172; David B. Ottaway, ‘US Concerned About
      Soviets’ Use of Bombers in Afghanistan’, Washington Post, 1 Nov. 1988, p.A27; Scott
      Shane and Tom Bowman, ‘Espionage from the Frontlines’, Baltimore Sun, 8 Dec. 1995,
      pp.20A–21A.
142. Alexander Dallin, Black Box: KAL 007 and the Superpowers (Berkeley: U. of California
      Press 1985) pp.58–61; Richard Halloran, ‘Soviet’s Defenses Called Inflexible’, New York
      Times, 18 Sept. 1983, p.A1; Walter Pincus, ‘The Soviets Had The Wrong Stuff’,
      Washington Post, 18 Sept. 1983, p.C5; Dusko Doder, ‘Soviets Said to Remove Air
      Officers’, Washington Post, 5 Oct. 1983, p.1; Bill Gertz, ‘Soviet 007 Tape Revealing’,
      Washington Times, 15 Aug. 1992, p.A1; William L. Norton, Briefing on The Re¬
      Organization of Soviet Air and Air Defense Forces (Falls Church, VA: E-Systems Melpar
      Division 1984) pp.29–33, paper presented at the Strategy 84 Conference, Washington DC,
      12 March 1984.
143. Desmond Wettern, ‘Soviet Pilot Wrongly Identified Intruding Cessna’, Jane’s Defence
      Weekly, 20 June 1987, p.1289.
144. Angelo Codevilla, Informing Statecraft: Intelligence for a New Century (NY: The Free
      Press 1992)p.l24.
145. For its work on ‘Ivy Bells’, the Halibut earned Navy Unit Citations in 1971, 1974 and
      1975, and a Presidential Unit Citation in 1972. Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew, Blind
      Man’s Bluff (NY: Public Affairs 1998) pp.158–83; Michael Dobbs, ‘KGB Chief Details US
      Spy Operation’, Washington Post, 3 Sept. 1988, p.Al; Norman Polmar, ‘How Many Spy
      Subs’, Naval Institute Proceedings, Dec. 1996, p.87. For the Russian perspective, see
      Nikolai Brusnitsin, Openness and Espionage (Moscow 1990) pp.13–14; and N. Burbiga,
      ‘A Fishy Day at theCIA’,Izvestia, 1 March 1994.
146. Previously, US counterintelligence officials had believed that the operation had been
      compromised by for CIA officer Edwin Lee Howard, who before being fired from the CIA
      in 1983 had been trained to retrieve the TAW tape recordings from the communications
      tunnel south of Moscow. Pete Earley, Confessions of a Spy: The Real Story of Aldrich Ames
      (NY: Putnam’s 1997) pp.117, 193; James Risen, ‘In Defense of the CIA’s Daring-Do’, Los
      Angeles Times, 4 Jan. 1996, p.Al. Photographs of the TAW tap and recording equipment is
      shown in Brusnitsin, Openness and Espionage (note 146) pp. 14–15.
147. Jay Peterzell, ‘Spying and Sabotage by Computer’, Time, 20 March 1989, p.25.
148. Richard Harwood, ‘Spies Overshadowed by the Bureaucracy’, Washington Post, 8 Dec.
       1985, p.A24.
149. Bob Drogin, ‘NSA Blackout Reveals Downside of Secrecy’, Los Angeles Times, 13 March
      2000, p.A1.
150. Ronald Reagan, ‘Remarks at Dedication Ceremonies for New Facilities’, 26 Sept. 1986,
      Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, No. 39, 29 Sept. 1986, p. 1278.
151. Remarks at a Presentation Ceremony for the National Security Agency Worldwide Awards
66       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     in Fort Meade, Maryland, May 1, 1991, http://csdl.tamu.edu/bushlibrary/papers/1991/
     91050101.html.
152. Harry Rowe Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge: Harvard UP 1970)
     p.m.
153. Ferris, 'Coming in from the Cold War (note 4) p.92.
154. Neil Munro, 'The Puzzle Palace in Post-Cold War Pieces', Washington Technology, 11
     Aug. 1994, p. 14.
155. McConnell, 'The Future of SIGINT' (note 7).
                                     3
      GCHQ and Sigint in Early Cold War,
                  1945–70

                     RICHARD J. ALDRICH




Two immediate observations can be made about the place of the
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in during the early
Cold War. First, far less has been written about this organisation than either
of the other two British secret services. A recent bibliography on British
secret service catalogues hundreds of items. Only half a dozen relate to
GCHQ after 1945. By contrast the literature on post-war SIS and MI5 is
vast.1 Second, by most forms of measurement, whether it we take the
volume of product, the size of budget, or numbers of personnel, GCHQ was
the most important service. Personnel is the easiest indicator to track. In
1966 GCHQ and its attendant supporting collection organisations
commanded about 11,500 staff. This was not only more than SIS and MI5
combined. It was also larger than the entire Diplomatic Service, including
the Foreign Office in London and all its overseas embassies and consulates.2
    How can this curious disparity be accounted for? Those who prefer a
conspiratorial approach will identify a purposive element in the improbably
low profile of GCHQ. In the summer of 1945 the British Joint Intelligence
Committee (JIC) deemed signals intelligence, together with deception, to be
the two areas that were absolutely beyond the pale in terms of the writing of
the history of the Second World War. Both the JIC and the London Signals
Intelligence Board (LSIB) devoted some time to the issue of how these
matters might be effectively hidden. A programme of official histories, in
which these matters would be airbrushed out, assisted by historians who
were aware of these matters, was viewed as a key part of the process. The
JIC did not expect these secrets to remain intact for long. But to their
surprise it was nearly 30 years before Bletchley Park became a familiar part
the wider historical vocabulary, beginning with Group Captain Frederick
Winterbotham’s Ultra Secret in 1974. By contrast, books about the role of
SOE in the Second World War began to appear in the late 1940s.3
68      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     Yet historians needed no help from the authorities to go badly off track.
The arcane matters of modern cryptanalysis are not an immediately
attractive subject for historical writing. The work of special operations or
secret agents, dependent on human beings for their progress, has seemed
more accessible and more comprehensible. Market forces have also played
their part. Since the 1960s British popular culture has developed a strong
appetite for revelations about Soviet agents in government, especially
‘molemania’, with its rich tapestry of revelation, governmental
embarrassment and tales of nefarious doings in high places. In 1963 the
Profumo Scandal confirmed the growing extent of public fascination with
such subjects. Thereafter, in both East and West, secret services themselves
capitalised on public tastes, sponsoring more semi-official accounts of
defecting agents. Kim Philby’s My Silent War (1968) must surely count as
one of the most successful. The resulting literature offers a misleading sense
of the broad contours of British secret service and GCHQ figures very little
in this landscape.
     The 1990s saw some marginal change. The end of the Cold War
triggered the release of a small, but significant proportion, of the vast
archives of GCHQ and NSA for the early Cold War period. Perhaps more
importantly, the increasingly central place of communications and
information, together with forecasts of the ‘knowledge-based economy’ has
required GCHQ to adopt a more public profile as its deals with issues of
information security. Yet the majority of GCHQ’s activities during the last
half-century still remain unknown. This short essay can do no more than
identify the extent to which some recent archival releases allow us to peer a
little further into a largely unexplored territory.

LONG-RANGE PLANNING

The critical change at GCHQ towards the end of the war was not targets, but
attitude. Led by an aggressive managerial figure, Sir Edward Travis, and
having brought in highly intelligent university-educated staff who enjoyed
free-thinking and free-speaking, an atmosphere of constructive self¬
criticism developed. In 1945 all of Britain’s established secret services were
still somewhat antiquated in their approach to operations, reflecting the
interwar years of moribund leadership and under-funding. But GCHQ had
the keenest appreciation of this fact and was the most active in seeking to
transform itself.
     Wartime Government Code and Cipher School (GC&CS), the
predecessor to GCHQ had not been a real intelligence service, but instead a
code and cipher breaking centre. It had also been something of an underdog,
working in the shadow of SIS, and without even the limited organisational
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                             69
intelligence structures of SIS and MI5. Wartime expansion and contact with
the Americans, had opened the eyes of GCHQ to what was possible. Now a
core of determined individuals in GCHQ were eager to promote change. In
1944 they began the long-range planning that would turn wartime Bletchley
Park – with its chess players and crossword puzzlers – into GCHQ, Britain’s
premier post-war secret service, with a strong sense of identity, a large
budget and predatory designs on other bodies. Three key figures were
instrumental in this change. First, Gordon Welchman, the man behind
Bletchley Park’s Hut Six. Second, Harry Hinsley, who would serve as the
‘sherpa’ for the Anglo-American Commonwealth Sigint summits of
1945–48. Third, Edward Crankshaw, who had handled wartime Sigint
discussions with the Soviets.
    On 15 September 1944, only weeks after the liberation of Paris, GCHQ
set up a committee to study its post-war future. These three influential
GCHQ officers set out their future vision for Travis. They surveyed the
entire British intelligence scene, calling for a more centralised ‘Foreign
Intelligence Office’ as part of a coherent British national intelligence
organisation. Led by Gordon Welchman, they pressed for a comprehensive
body dealing with all forms of Sigint, and also with a modern signals
security organisation with the latest communications engineering. This
would become a truly modern ‘Intelligence Centre’ governing all types of
interception activities.
    Before the war with Germany, they conceded, GC&CS had been ‘little
more than a cryptographic centre’ with no ability to sift, collect or interpret
material. There was little appreciation of the coming importance of
electronic engineering, and little conception of the coming need for large¬
scale planning to cope with the exploitation of intelligence produced on an
industrial scale. University-based recruiting had saved them. This had
produced some natural leaders who, together with the few pre-war figures of
wide outlook on the permanent staff, had made ‘a passable show in this war’.
    The Japanese war, with its need for major organisations overseas, would
be ongoing for some time – probably into 1946 – or so they thought. They
concluded that Japanese traffic presented a more complicated problem to
which they could not make a major contributions. The Americans were
ahead on Japanese systems and they should be left to it. Sigint for figures
such as Admiral Lord Mountbatten and General Sir William Slim fighting
in South East Asia was not considered a high managerial priority.
    Instead Welchman’s group made a hard-nosed proposal. There were few
people in GCHQ with real ability in general planning and strategic co-
ordination. Indeed, they said, ‘it would be difficult to count as many as a
dozen’. This should not be wasted on the Japanese war. So, they insisted:
‘as soon as the German war is over, as many as possible of the few potential
70      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

planners should be set to work in the direction of our three immediate
objectives, instead of devoting more of their time to Japanese problems’.
GCHQ, should not lose touch with developments in the field of Japanese
Sigint problems, since there were issues worth learning from this sphere.
But the approach was to extract technical benefits from the Japanese war,
not to expend resources upon it. For British commanders such as Slim in
Burma the tag of the ‘Forgotten Army’ was wholly appropriate.4
    GCHQ moved quickly. They felt time was against them and so it was
 ‘imperative to make an approach to the present Prime Minster at the earliest
possible moment’. Any successor to Churchill, they reasoned, however
sympathetic, could not have a real appreciation of ‘the fruits of intelligence
in this war’ or Churchill’s keen appreciation of the importance of tight
security. In Churchill they had a heavyweight advocate and so they wished
to strike while the iron was hot. They feared a return to the pre-war situation
of under-recognition of what Sigint could achieve, noting that even now, the
true scale of their wartime output was know to a ‘very few’ in ‘high places’.
Moreover, the really talented Sigint planners were newcomers, and soon
they would return to their pre-war occupations, unless some positive action
was taken to retain them. Quite simply this came down to cash. The post-
war organisation had to have sufficiently high status to secure ‘a sufficiently
liberal supply of money to enable it to attract men of first rate ability’. They
were thinking particularly of engineers and electronics experts, even now
they had to subsist with ‘amateurish engineering groups’. They were also
sensitive to the shift to peacetime intelligence arguing that, in the post-war
period, they would have to give equal wait to ‘all types of intelligence about
foreign countries, including scientific, commercial and economic matters’,
a tacit reference to the targeting of friendly states.5
    These ambitions shaped the progress of GCHQ as it moved from its
wartime site at Bletchley to new accommodation at Eastcote at Uxbridge on
the suburban fringes of North-West London. By 1946 GCHQ had escaped the
formal control of Major-General Sir Stewart Menzies, the Chief of SIS, to
become more of a separate intelligence service in its own right. It quickly
achieved supremacy in the new field of electronic intelligence, the monitoring
of non-communication electronic signals from radars and missiles, known as
Elint, and hitherto dominated by the three services. GCHQ’s move into this
field began in 1948 and was completed in 1952. But there were further battles
ahead. It was 1969 before its wishes to control all aspects of signals work,
including communications security (Comsec), were realised.6
    In 1945 GCHQ continued to advocate a centralised Foreign Intelligence
Office, tied closely to the Prime Minster and the Cabinet Office. William F.
Clarke, who had served continuously from 1916, now applied his long-term
experience to the issue of GCHQ in the post-war world. He warned that the
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            71
‘enormous power wielded by the Treasury’ might be brought to bear. As in
1919, work on military ciphers might cease in favour of concentration on
diplomatic material only. This, he insisted ‘may be disastrous’ and the
resulting damage to ongoing cryptographic research might mean that in a
future conflict, enemy military traffic might prove inaccessible. It was also
essential, he counselled, to build up the prestige of GCHQ. Its very secrecy
was its worst enemy, ensuring that many in high places did not know of its
true value.
    There was also the ‘potential danger’ of a Labour government coming to
power, recalling the interwar Labour government and its aversion to things
secretive. Clarke also paused to consider Roosevelt’s emerging United
Nations, observing that if the new international organisation took the step of
abolishing all code and cipher communications this action ‘would
contribute more to a permanent peace than any other’. ‘This however’ he
conceded ‘is probably the counsel of perfection’ and seemed to him highly
improbable. Instead codemaking and codebreaking seemed likely to be
major activity in the post-war world.7

FROM WAR TO PEACE

It is all but impossible to draw a distinction between GCHQ’s work on
wartime Germany and her growing work on the Soviet Union in the 1940s.
Knowledge of Germany required the tracking of events on the Eastern Front
and involved learning as much as possible about the Soviet effort. British
intelligence began to value the Germans for their knowledge of the Soviet
Union as soon as Ultra came on stream. German messages used to send their
own Sigint summaries back to Berlin were, in turn, intercepted. This
‘second-hand’ Sigint proved to be London’s best source on the performance
of the Soviet forces. As early as 1943 the JIC were able to produce detailed
and accurate reports on the capabilities of the Soviet Air Force based on
Luftwaffe Sigint material.8
    In July 1944 the Combined Intelligence Priorities Committee began
consulting at Bletchley Park about what material they wished to scoop from
an occupied Germany. Suitably briefed, by early 1945, Intelligence Assault
Units were moving into Germany with the forward elements of Allied
formations, looking for all kinds of German documents, experimental
weapons and atomic plant. Combined Anglo-American Target Intelligence
Committee (TICOMs) teams were despatched from Bletchley Park to
Germany to seek out cryptographic equipment and Sigint personnel. They
were not disappointed. Stopping at various German headquarters along the
way they ended up at Hitler’s Berchtesgaden retreat in the Bavarian Alps,
where they found a Luftwaffe communications centre and a large amount of
72      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

communications equipment. Eventually German POWs were persuaded to
lead them to a vast haul of materials buried nearby and four large German
lorries were loaded to capacity with contents that were then unearthed. The
teams returned to Bletchley Park with their haul on 6 June 1945.9
    By 22 July 1945, the US Army European Theatre Interrogation Centre
had completed a dossier on the ‘German G-2 Service in the Russian
campaign’ running to over 220 pages. This gave considerable attention to
the role of the Wehrmacht’s Signal Intelligence Liaison Officers, ‘the most
important man in the circle of the G-2’s sources’, delivering the fruits of
Germans Signal Reconnaissance Regiments tasked with wireless
interception on the battlefront. Soviet radio discipline, they concluded, was
very good, and much depended upon the interpretation of radio silence or
knowing the transmission habits of particular operators.10 The United States
was soon seeking to reconstruct the German service if only to ensure the
security of the communications of the nascent German administration. In
1947, Dr Erich Hutenhain laid the foundation of a new German crypto
service based at Camp King, Oberursel, co-located with the early Gehlen
Organisation. Inevitably, this unit had to be treated to surprise briefing on
the inadequacy of wartime German Enigma machines.11
    GCHQ’s corporate takeover of the Axis Sigint effort was not limited to
Germany. There were also dividends in post-war Italy. This flowed partly
from the fortuitous coincidence that the deputy chief of the SIS station in
Rome from 1944, Sheridan Russell, had previously worked at Bletchley
Park and was sensitive to the fact that the Italians were talented
cryptanalysts. By 1944 he was second in command of the SIS station in
Rome under his namesake, Brian Ashford Russell.12 Safe regular
employment and a steady income was offered to many elements of Italian
intelligence after 1943.13
    But there were others bidding in the same market and a substantial
remnant of 80 Sigint staff under Major Barbieri continued to work for the
Germans at a station near Brescia until April 1945. When this latter group
were finally interrogated in Rome in mid-1945 they proved to have a large
quantity of material, including photostatic copies of the codebooks of
Turkey, Rumania, Ecuador and Bolivia. They had reconstructed codebooks
of France, Switzerland and the Vatican. They also had smaller amounts of
British and American traffic. By 1945 Barbieri’s unit was concentrating on
French diplomatic traffic, ‘a large number being messages to Paris either
from BONNET [Ambassador] in NEW YORK or from CATROUX
 [Ambassador] in Moscow’. This traffic offered insights into subjects as
diverse as Soviet-Yugoslav relations, Soviet policy in Germany, French
economic negotiations with the United States and French plans for
exploiting the Saar coal mines in Germany.14
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            73

    Under British control, this Italian unit worked continuously into the
post-war period without deviating from its French target. Major Barbieri’s
Sigint unit was an SID (Italian Army Intelligence) element within 808
Communication Service Battalion. Barbieri was proud of his efforts, but
pressed for more staff. So many of the best cryptographers, he complained,
had been captured by the French in Africa, adding ‘the FRENCH are now
employing them in their own service!’. Nevertheless, the British concluded
that the Italians were ‘doing remarkably well with the limited reserves at
their disposal’.15
    By mid-1946 the British were giving their Italians new tasks, including
Soviet ‘Taper’ five-figure traffic. British liaison officers with the Italians
were working closely with GCHQ in Britain on the identification of new
‘Taper groups’. Remarkably, some of the Italian operators did ‘not know
that they are intercepting Taper traffic’. Occasionally an operator, after
intercepting several typical Taper messages, would note that ‘the procedure
signal ... is often used by the Russians’. It was obvious that senior Italian
Sigint officers knew that Taper traffic ‘which had been taken with so much
depth and continuity for the past month’ was Soviet intelligence traffic.16
The process was productive yet precarious. British Sigint officers handled
Barbieri’s organisation carefully lest they do something that might ‘lead to
them asking what is done with traffic they are passing’ and then refusing to
co-operate further.17

GCHQ AFTER 1945

GCHQ shrank at the end of 1945. The pressure to demobilise, combined
with the end of the need for operational Sigint, affected even the privileged
ranks of signals intelligence. British Army Sigint collection units shrank
from 4,000 personnel in December 1945 to about 1,000 by March 1946.18
Re-organisation was facilitated by relocation. Some of its equipment was
constructed at the laboratories of the Post Office Research Department at
Dollis Hill in North London and it was no coincidence that Travis chose to
move the organisation to Eastcote near Uxbridge in North-West London,
only a few miles from Dollis Hill. Here it remained until 1952 when his
successor, chose to relocate to Cheltenham.19
    In the late 1940s the key target for GCHQ was the Soviet atomic bomb.
The British Chiefs of Staff were fascinated by the problem of Britain’s
relative vulnerability to attack by weapons of mass destruction and wanted
forecasts on this crucial issue. The JIC ordered Britain’s codebreakers to
focus their efforts upon this, together with other strategic weapons systems
such as chemical and biological programmes, ballistic rockets and air
defence. Although the JIC placed these subjects in a special high priority
74      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

category of priority it was to no avail. The Soviet bomb, took the Western
allies by surprise in late August 1949.
    Other Soviet activities, including espionage and diplomatic initiatives
constituted second and third priorities, but here too there were thin pickings.
Many Soviet messages employed onetime pads which, if correctly used,
could not be broken, although some machine-based military ciphers seem to
have been read. The extent to which Britain was surprised by the Tito–Stalin
split in 1948 underlines limited success enjoyed against its diplomatic
targets. Secure Soviet communications were only part of the problem.
Moscow and its satellites used landlines which could not be easily
intercepted, instead of wireless transmissions. It was these problems that
prompted the British to follow the Soviets down the path of more extensive
physical bugging in the mid-1950s.20
    High priority targets aside, GCHQ was nevertheless providing Whitehall
with large quantities of material in the late 1940s, albeit of a secondary and
tertiary order. They continued to attack the communications of many states
with vulnerable cipher systems. Some were persuaded to adopt Hagelin¬
type machines previously used by the Axis, in the belief that these machines
provided a secure means of communication. This was a belief that GCHQ
did nothing to undermine. The JIC had requested material on subjects such
as Arab nationalism and the relations of Arab states with the UK and USA,
the attitude to the Soviet Union, France, Italy and the Arab states towards
the future of the ex-Italian colonies, especially Libya. GCHQ was also
urged to focus on the Zionist movement including its intelligence services.
These subjects proved more accessible. In 1946 Alan Stripp, a codebreaker
who had spent the war in India working on Japanese codes, suddenly found
himself redeployed to the Iranian border. During the Azerbaijan crisis of
 1946 he worked on Iranian and Afghan communications for the duration of
the crisis.21
     Although GCHQ was always the predominant post-war British secret
service much of its activity was hidden by the use of the signals units of the
armed services for interception. Each of the three services operated half a
dozen sites in Britain. GCHQ also had civilian outstations including a Sigint
processing centre at 10 Chesterfield Street in London, a listening post
covering London at Ivy Farm, Knockholt in Kent and a Post Office listening
post at Gilnahirk in Northern Ireland.22
     GCHQ had overseas stations hidden with embassies and high
commissions in countries such as Canada and Turkey. There were also
 service outposts. In the Middle East, the base of Ayios Nikolaos, just outside
Famagusta on Cyprus became a critical intelligence centre, receiving Army
 and RAF Sigint units as they gradually departed from Palestine, Iraq and
 Egypt.23
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            75
    Further east, the Royal Navy maintained its shore intercept site at HMS
Anderson near Colombo on Ceylon, and the Army began reconstruction of
its pre-war Sigint site at Singapore. But the main British Sigint centre in
Asia after 1945 was Hong Kong, initially staffed by RAF personnel. Here,
together with help from Australia’s Defence Signals Directorate, they
captured Chinese and Soviet radio traffic.24
    Despite London’s decision to give GCHQ the lion’s share of British
intelligence resources and the tendency to bury some of the costs in other
budgets, resources were tight. On 22 January 1952, the Chiefs of Staff had
met together with the Permanent Under Secretary of the British Foreign
Office to review plans for improving British intelligence. GCHQ came out
on top in this exercise. Its cutting edge programmes, mostly in the area of
computers and ‘high speed analytical equipment’ for communications
intelligence were given ‘highest priority’, and government research and
supply elements were instructed accordingly. The Admiralty were
beginning a new programme to build better receivers for ground-based and
seaborne ‘Technical Search Operations’.
    Elint was no less critical and so new airborne radio search receivers and
direction-finding (D/F) projects run out of the Central Signals
Establishment were also to be given ‘all possible priority’. The Chiefs of
Staff continually reiterated the ‘very great importance’ to speeding up
development and construction in these ‘very sensitive’ areas.25
    By November 1952 a major review of British intelligence was
underway. The process was prolonged by the primitive nature of available
managerial instruments. Patrick Reilly, who liased between SIS and the
Foreign Office, confessed that no one knew what Britain spent on
intelligence. Now, ‘for the first time’, Sir Edward Bridges from the Treasury
and a committee of permanent secretaries was assembling some figures so
they could review intelligence costs in the context of the overall defence
budget. The Chiefs of Staff wanted ‘increased expenditure on intelligence’
within the general programme of Korean War re-armament, but were unsure
of the figures or how much detail to give to ministers. All were clear that in
the short term the emphasis should be ‘for Sigint’. Eric Jones, the Director
of GCHQ, reported that he was busy filling the 300 extra staff posts recently
authorised. GCHQ had proposed a further increment for an extra 366 staff
as to follow. GCHQ was moving from strength to strength.26

GCHQ AND ITS ALLIES

As early as 1945, most English-speaking countries had committed
themselves to post-war signals intelligence cooperation. Policy-makers at
the highest level had come to expect a world in which a global Sigint
76      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

alliance rendered enemy intentions almost transparent. They were not about
to relinquish that privilege willingly. In the autumn of 1945, when President
Truman was winding up OSS, he was also giving permission for American
Sigint activity to continue and approved negotiations on continued Allied
cooperation.27 All desired the maximum option. On 19 November 1945,
Admiral of the Fleet Sir Andrew Cunningham, the Chief of the Naval Staff
attended a critical meeting of the British Chiefs of staff. There was ‘much
discussion about 100 per cent cooperation with the USA about Sigint’. he
recorded, adding ‘decided that less than 100 per cent was not worth having.’
In Ottawa, George Glazebrook recommended to the Canadian JIC that
Canada enhance her independent Sigint effort in order to stake claim in this
secretive and emerging cooperative system. ‘It is paramount’ he insisted
‘that Canada should make an adequate contribution to the general pool.’28
    Yet the way ahead was strewn with obstacles and the package of
agreements, letters, and memoranda of understanding, often referred to as
the UKUSA treaty, that sealed this alliance, was not completed until 1948.
As this agreement emerged, Britain derived considerable benefit from her
dominance over Empire-Commonwealth partners. The semi-feudal
relationship which London enjoyed is no better illustrated than in Australia
where Sigint operations were controlled by London. Only in 1940 did
Australia established her own separate organisation. When this became the
Australian DSD, formed at Albert Park Barracks in Melbourne on 12
November 1947, it remained in the shadow of GCHQ. Four Australian
applicants for the directorship were rejected in favour of Britain’s
Commander Teddy Poulden, who filled the senior DSD posts with 20
GCHQ staff and communicated with GCHQ in his own special cipher.
During the winter of 1946–47, a Commonwealth Sigint conference was held
in London, chaired by Travis, during which each country received
designated spheres of activity.29
    Canada’s Sigint organisation under the long-serving Lt. Colonel Ed
Drake suffered similar treatment. On 13 April 1946 the Canadian Prime
Minster, Mackenzie King authorized the consolidation of several wartime
organisations into a small post-war unit of about 100 staff known as the
Communications Branch of the National Research Council (CBNRC).
Again, the senior post were filled by staff seconded by GCHQ, prompting
them to say that CBNRC stood for ‘Communications Branch – No Room
for Canadians’, and by the late 1940s Drake had resolved to offset this by
developing better relations with the US Army Security Agency.30
    However, the Americans were also inclined to give Canada second-class
treatment. During the 1948 discussions of the UKUSA Agreement it
became clear that the US Communications Intelligence Board was equally
anxious to prevent an information free-for-all among all its signatories.
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                             77
They preferred to hand material to the Canadians ‘on a “need to know”
basis’ and were anxious to prevent a proliferation of liaison officers.31
    Although GCHQ representatives were often over-awed by the scale of
American Sigint resources, matters looked quite different from Washington.
With the war over and an economising Republican Congress controlling the
federal purse-strings, resources for American Comint interception activities
were remarkably tight before 1950. As Matthew Aid has conclusively
shown, this led to a state of parlous under-preparedness prior to the Korean
War. It also prevented the European expansion that American Sigint had
hoped for. In 1949, Army Security Agency interception units in Europe
were still passing their product to GCHQ rather than back to Washington,
for analysis. GCHQ retained primary responsibility for areas such as
Eastern Europe, the Near East and Africa.32
    The exchange of communications intelligence between these allies was
of several types. A narrow range of Comint-producing agencies exchanged
all manner of data, both raw and processed. A much wider range of bodies
circulated the finished product. The key instrument was the ‘Comintsum’, a
digest of latest ‘hot’ material which made its way around Comint-cleared
centres. London would send 20 copies of this document to Washington on a
regular basis, with two copies going to air force intelligence, two to army
intelligence and so forth.33
    UKUSA only codified and smoothed out what was clearly a pre-existing
practice. Thus, as early as 28 April 1948, General Charles Cabell, Head of
USAF Intelligence, reviewed the intelligence arrangements in support of the
atomic strike plan ‘Halfmoon’. ‘At the present time’ he noted with
satisfaction ‘there is complete interchange of communications intelligence
information between the cognizant United States and British agencies. It is
not believed that the present arrangements ... could be improved.’34
    The 1950s saw the development of spheres of influence. For example
relations with Norway were an American responsibility, while relations
with the Swedes belonged to GCHQ, although this demarcation was not
strictly adhered to.35 GCHQ enjoyed the benefits of a panoply of bases
provided by Britain’s imperial and post-imperial presence. Although the
empire was shrinking, the very process of retreat often rendered the new
successor states more willing to grant limited base facilities to the departing
British. These facilities seemed innocuous, and often termed
‘communications relay facilities’, however the reality was often different.
Many countries were unwitting hosts to GCHQ collection sites.
    Ceylon, which became independent in 1948, is a good example. Britain
was allowed to retain a communications relay centre at HMS Anderson,
close to the city of Colombo, on Ceylon, which was in practice a large
Sigint collection site. In 1949 the Ceylonese government decided to develop
78      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the area where the aerial farm was located and so asked the British to move
sites. London was amenable for officials were convinced that again, at the
new site, ‘the real purpose could be easily disguised’.36
     By October 1951 the new station that would replace Anderson was being
planned and Dr John Burrough, a senior GCHQ official, was attending
regular meetings at the Admiralty to discuss the technical problems. It
proved difficult to identify a site which was not too remote and yet did not
suffer from interference either from town or from naval transitions. Even the
ignition systems of cars on a busy highway up to 500 yards away could
cause unacceptable interference. Moreover this station was upgraded to
monitor signals traffic from ‘all bearings’ and needed a facility that covered
more than 400 acres. By 1952 they had decided on a site at Perkar, about
two miles from the old station at Anderson.37
    Ceylon revealed how the remnants of empire helped to offset the
imbalance between British and American capabilities. In January 1951, the
US National Security Council noted that the Pentagon and the CIA had been
keen to construct ‘elaborate radio facilities to be operated by US personnel’
in Ceylon. But Ceylon had resisted the idea of even a ‘modest’ US Navy
radio station. They had accepted they were every unlikely to establish a
foothold here and that any collection from this site would be conducted by
the British.38
    Island locations, including Britain, were intrinsically attractive because
they would be slower to be overrun in any wartime military operations. In
September 1951, the 14th Radio Squadron Mobile, a unit of the US Air
Force Security Service, was deployed to Cyprus and tasked with
‘conducting communication intercept activities’ across the Middle East. A
further US Sigint site on Crete had been authorised and other in Greece and
Iran were being investigated. The product, while shared with the British,
was not disseminated to other NATO partners in Europe.39
    In time of war, the emergency evacuation plans for Cyprus called for US
Sigint personnel to be relocated in British bases in the Suez Canal zone
under a scheme codenamed ‘Applesauce’. In Asia the reverse was true.
Sigint units from Hong Kong would be relocated to US bases on Okinawa.
British Sigint units in Hong Kong were joined by the Americans, anxious to
expand capability following the outbreak of the Korean War. On 26
November 1951 the Senior US Liaison Officer in Britain informed the
London Signals Intelligence Board of Washington’s ‘urgent need’ for a US
Air Force Sigint unit to be deployed to Hong Kong. Other sites were
developed on Taiwan in an attempt to remedy the yawning intelligence gap
in East Asia revealed by the outbreak of the conflict in Korea.40
    In the 1950s, Anglo-American relations were made easier in the Comint
field by the arrival of the National Security Agency (NSA) which imposed
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                             79
some order upon the squabbling of the US armed services. In 1952 the
Brownell report had recommended to Truman the creation of a strong
centralising force. The three separate American armed services fought a
desperate rearguard action against the creation of the NSA. General
Samford of US Air Force intelligence denounced ‘strong central control of
the national COMINT effort’ as a ‘major error’. He also warned darkly
about Comint slipping away towards civilian control under the office of the
Secretary of Defense. But Truman’s mind was made up and the NSA began
to reshape American Comint.41 However, the efforts of NSA to extend its
control over Elint and to ‘fuse’ it with Comint processes would be more
troubled and stretched on into the 1960s. American officials often envied
the more centralised British model.42
    Resources enforced increasing British dependency upon the United
States during the early 1950s. Dependency could be disguised in the field of
Sigint gathering, even in some aspects of processing. But in other areas,
such as communications security or Comsec, the threadbare nature of the
British effort was all too obvious. Many British machines used for
enciphering communications were still of Second World War vintage and no
longer offered the desired level of security. Britain and indeed other NATO
countries could not afford to replace these machines rapidly. The United
States offered assistance, allowing some of its cryptographic principles to
be adopted by Britain and paying for new machines operating on combined
circuits carrying communications between the US, UK and NATO.
     The Combined Cipher Machine (CCM) widely used in the early 1950s
and superior to the British Typex, was nevertheless a major subject of
concern. American assistance allowed NATO to aim to dispose of it by
 1955. While making available American cipher principles and machines for
NATO use, it reserved a higher grade system, the CSP 2900 cipher machine
 ‘for exclusive U.S. use’.43
     A shared problem for London and Washington was the need to supply
Comint to multi-national centres such as NATO and Supreme Headquarters
Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE). NATO was considered to be insanitary
from a security point of view. Even General Dwight Eisenhower’s SHAPE
HQ, where British and American officers only mingled with the French,
was considered a major security problem. Yet SHAPE’S efficacy in war
depended on strong flow of Comint to support the direction of operations.
In early December 1952 London hosted an Anglo-American conference to
work out a solution with the Intelligence Chief at SHAPE. The US Army
was to place a liaison officer at GCHQ to co-ordinate a flow of Comint to
 SHAPE and the NSA was to supply advanced cipher machines for the
purpose. Remarkably, the whole system was to remain ‘informal’ to allow
the material to stay in the hands of British and American officers only.44 This
80      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

was complemented by an arrangement where the senior intelligence officer
dealing with Sigint at SHAPE was always British or American and never
French.45

S P E C I A L PARTNERS – AIR FORCES AND ELINT SHARING

The closest Anglo-American intelligence relationship during the immediate
post-war period as probably that developed between RAF intelligence and
the US Air Force. General Charles Cabell (later Deputy Director of the
CIA) was head of US Air Force Intelligence as the USAF became fully
independent of the US Army in 1947–48. While establishing an expanded
intelligence organisation and getting to grips with being a fully independent
service, the American found RAF intelligence to be an ideal partner. RAF
intelligence was headed by the convivial Air Vice-Marshal Lawrence
Pendred, who was anxious to cement the Anglo-American relationship.
This growing friendship also reflected the fact that GCHQ had identified air
power as a critical area for Sigint, especially those arcane forms of Sigint
associated with strategic bombing. Sigint in the air was one of the major
growth areas of the early intelligence Cold War.
     Air intelligence was keen to develop ‘Elint’ or electronic intelligence.
This involved the interception of electronic signals that did not carry
messages, but instead offered information about subjects such as radar sites
and air defences. Such information was invaluable for the operational
planning for air attack against the Soviet Union. It was equally invaluable
to anyone planning peacetime ‘spy-flights’ over Soviet airspace and looking
for gaps in Soviet radar cover. Thus, in this area, air intelligence collectors
were also consumers, not least to protect the security of their own missions.
Elint was first developed by the Allies in the face of radio-guided German
air raids during the Second World War and was later sited at the Central
Signals Establishment at RAF Watton.46
     Towards the end of the war it continued to be refined against Japan. An
elaborate Elint unit was set up under Mountbatten’s South East Asia
Command under the improbable cover name of the ‘Noise Investigation
Bureau’. Elint equipped ‘Ferret Aircraft’ patrolled the night skies over
Rangoon and then Singapore listening to Japanese radars in the spring and
 summer of 1945.47
     Exchange in this area began early. General Curtis LeMay had been given
permission to begin exchanging Elint with the British on an informal basis
 at the end of 1947, but it is likely that ad hoc cooperation began earlier. In
 1948 Elint sharing was being brought within the growing body of Western
 Sigint agreements. At this time GCHQ was attempting to extend its control
 over service-based Elint activity. GCHQ approached Washington with a
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                           81
proposal to ‘extend the present British-U.S. Comint collaboration to include
countermeasures, intercept activities and intelligence’ in the field of Elint.
This was put forward by Colonel Marr-Johnston, the GCHQ liaison officer
in Washington, who then held discussions with Captain J. Wenger, a senior
naval cryptanalyst. He suggested coordinated patterns of ‘Ferret’ flights
with the resulting intelligence being swapped ‘via Comint channels’.48 By
1952 GCHQ had achieved complete control over the Elint field in the UK
and was managing relations with the Americans in this field.
    Initially, the RAF was ahead in this new field. By 1947 a fleet of
specially equipped as fleet of Lancaster and Lincoln aircraft patrolled the
East German border, monitoring Soviet air activity. This was complemented
by a programme of monitoring of basic low-level Soviet voice traffic by
ground stations at locations such as RAF Gatow in Berlin. British ‘Ferrets’
began their first forays into the Baltic in June 1948 and the Black Sea in
September 1948.49 In 1948 they began to supplemented by American
prototype B-29 ‘Ferrets’ flying missions from Scotland to the Spitzbergen
area. B-29 ‘Ferrets’ were also supplied to the RAF under the Mutual
Assistance Act from 1950.50
    By 1948 much of the perimeter of the Soviet Union was covered. A
British undercover team was operating in northern Iran monitoring Soviet
radar in Caucasus as well as Soviet missile tests at Kasputin Yar on the edge
of Caspian Sea. The team conducting this work were posing as
archaeologists, a favourite British cover for all sorts of intelligence work,
including atomic intelligence work ongoing in India at the same time. This
information was useful for RAF crews flying aerial reconnaissance of this
area from bases in Crete from 1948.51
    The Royal Navy conducted operations around the Soviet northern
periphery. In October and November 1949, the cruiser HMS Superb
undertook a month-long Elint investigation of the Kola Peninsula and the
naval base of Murmansk. The Royal Navy also maintained a chain of fixed
stations in the UK and a forward listening station at Kiel on the Baltic.52
The destruction of US Navy Elint aircraft off the coast of Latvia in
April 1950 while trying to identify new Soviet missile bases seemed to
indicate that aerial collection in these areas was more hazardous than ship¬
based or submarine-based collection. Further missions were postponed, but
the outbreak of the Korean War resulted in enhanced demand for
intelligence and operations resumed. From 1952 onwards much of this
work was carried out by RB-50Gs operating out of RAF Lakenheath in
East Anglia.53
    Elint in northern areas was a multinational activity. During the war
Bletchley Park had worked with the Norwegians and in 1946 the RAF were
assisting the Swedish Air Force in investigating what were thought to be
82      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Soviet rocket tests that intruded into Swedish air space. Washington took
responsibility for cooperation with the Norwegians and encouraged
reconnaissance in the area of Murmansk and Novaya Zemlya. By January
1949, detailed material on Soviet radars from Swedish intelligence was
making its way to Washington via British representatives who had taken
responsibility for cooperation with Sweden.54 There was particular interest
in the possibility that the Soviets might be attempting the further
development of German stealth technology, such as radar absorbent
coverings for submarine periscopes and snorkels.55
    The rearmament that followed the Korean War prompted a major
expansion of command communications and navigation which in return
demanded a greater Elint input. Some Elint could be monitored from sites
in Britain and these were expanded. For example in 1952 the 47th Radio
Squadron of the US AFSS opened a station at Kirknewton airbase in
Scotland listening to activity around the Kola Peninsula. But a great deal of
traffic was short-range requiring collection by ships and aircraft.56 By
October 1952 Elint had become so large that liaison arrangements had to be
expanded. London proposed the appointment of an additional officer,
Squadron Leader J.R. Mitchell as ‘liaison officer for GCHQ’ specialising on
Elint. Washington agreed and appointed William Trites and Forrest G. Hogg
to equivalent roles in Britain.57
    The Comint and Elint effort against the Soviet Air Force and associated
strategic systems was one of GCHQ’s key areas of achievement in the first
post-war decade. The arrival of the first Soviet atomic bomb may have
eluded it, but its subsequent operational deployment certainly did not.
During the early 1950s the Joint Intelligence Bureau in London and the
USAF target intelligence staffs had been busy exchanging sensitive data on
 ‘the mission of blunting the Soviet atomic offensive’. This involved the
early counter-force targeting of Soviet nuclear forces in the hope of
destroying them on the ground before they could be used. This was a
politically sensitive issue because it raised the issue of the use of nuclear
weapons at an early stage in any future conflict. Nevertheless, senior
officers in London had given particular attention to this matter because of
the vulnerability of the UK. The Americans were impressed by the
 ‘considerable progress that London had made on the counter atomic
problem’. GCHQ and the RAF had amassed ‘a significant amount of
evaluated intelligence, particularly in the special intelligence field, which
would be of the greatest value’. Most airfields and the operational
procedures for Soviet strategic air forces in the European theatre had been
mapped by 1952.58
     The full Anglo-American intelligence exchange in this field was
somewhat ironic given the different views held in London and Washington
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            83
on nuclear strategic issues at this time. However, full intelligence exchange
on targets continued regardless.

FLAPS AND S H O O T - D O W N S

Between 1956 and 1960 several ‘incidents’ reverberated upon intelligence¬
gathering from seaborne and airborne platforms. In each case ministers in
London reacted more strongly than their counterparts in Washington,
constraining the nature and frequency of subsequent operations. For the
practitioners this underlined the value of working with allies. In the late
 1940s and early 1950s the British had been more relaxed about forward
operations, such as over-flights, and had passed their dividends to
Washington. After 1956 the situation was reversed. London’s hesitancy in
the face of various flaps and shoot-downs accelerated the shift of
momentum in the world of signals intelligence towards the United States.
    The scale of political embarrassment that could be generated by bungled
surveillance operations was first underlined by the infamous Commander
‘Buster’ Crabb incident. In April 1956 operations were mounted against the
Soviet cruiser Ordzhonikide during the visit of Soviet leaders Bulganin and
Khruschev to Britain. Despite some robust exchanges the visit went well
and the Soviet delegation departed on 27 April 1956. But even as they left
the press had begun to speculate about the mysterious disappearance of a
British naval diver, Commander Lionel ‘Buster’ Crabb RNVR in the
vicinity of the visiting Soviet warships. His headless body was recovered
from the sea.59 Prime Minister Eden intended to take ‘disciplinary action’
and told the ministers concerned to order their staff to cooperate fully with
the inquiry.60 Sir John Sinclair, the Head of SIS was replaced by Sir Dick
White, Head of MI5.
    Sir Edward Bridges, a somewhat nineteenth-century figure, conducted a
thorough enquiry, employing the JIC mechanism to help him ferret out all
aspects of the Crabb affair. Bridges rightly identified ‘certain questions’ of
a broader nature arising out of the Crabb affair. On the one hand intrusive
intelligence operations clearly had a capacity to cause international
repercussions, but on the other hand the systems for their authorisation were
unclear. Bridges recommended a new and broader enquiry reviewing all of
Britain’s strategic intelligence and surveillance activities. It would assess
‘the balance between military intelligence on the one hand, and civil
intelligence and political risks on the other’. Eden gave this job to Sir
Norman Brook, the Cabinet Secretary, working with Patrick Dean,
Chairman of the JIC.61 This review had important consequences for
intelligence. In April 1956, simultaneous with Khrushchev’s visit to Britain,
the first CIA U-2 jet reconnaissance aircraft had arrived at RAF Lakenheath
84      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

and some U-2 work was Sigint-orientated. Eden now decided that this, and
a host of other operations, had to go.62
    Eden’s review also impacted on naval Sigint. Even more secret than the
U-2s were joint intelligence operations by British and American navies
using submarines. But in the backwash from the Crabb affair, British
submarine operations were cancelled and so the British half of the deal on
Anglo-American submarine-derived Sigint could not be delivered. British
officers in Washington spoke of their ‘embarrassment’ which would persist
‘until we can make good our part of the bargain’. Their underlying concern
was that Britain would be eclipsed by similar operations by American
submarine commanders in the Atlantic which they were expanding ‘so as
not to be outdone by the Pacific submariners’. British Naval Intelligence
wanted to keep their stake in the game and so urged not only that current
operation be restored, but that it be followed by ‘a bigger and better
operation’.63
    Rear-Admiral John Inglis, the British Director of Naval Intelligence in
London, was agitated. The main scoop provided by this series of American
operations had been a choice selection of short-range Comint and Elint:
‘Considerable VHF voice, IFF and radar traffic’ was recorded, mostly from
airborne and coastal defences. The take was voluminous. Moreover, while
the Soviets seemed prepared to repel ‘unfriendly air intrusion’ by contrast
‘no difficulties were placed in way of submarine visitors’ and Soviet anti-
submarine capability seemed low. The Commander in Chief US Pacific
Fleet was already pressing Washington to abandon the 12-mile restriction
on operations near the Soviet coast. But the question now was, were there
to be any further British operations?64
    By the end of 1956 the Royal Navy felt things slipping away from it.
Admiral Robert Elkins, the senior naval officer at the British Joint Staff
Mission in Washington wrote to Mountbatten to voice his concern. As
predicted, the US Navy was beginning its own independent operations off
Murmansk. Initially, the American Office of Naval Intelligence had decided
that the British Naval Intelligence Division was not to be informed. But
Admiral Warder from the secretive American Op31 section tasked with this
mission decided that it would be foolhardy not to draw on extensive British
experience of similar operations in these waters. So the British Commander
John Coote, who had been on the Murmansk run several times, was called
in to brief the first American crew. But this was only on the understanding
that he told no other British naval officers in Washington.
    These new American submarine intelligence operations off Murmansk
had been triggered by two factors. First, the cancellation of British
operations. Elkins lamented ‘we are no longer providing sufficient cover in
an area where we have hitherto been a reliable and productive source’.
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            85
Second, the US Navy had used the reports of previous British intelligence
operations off Murmansk to persuade the State Department that these
activities were valuable while ‘the risks of detection are negligible’. Elkins
accepted that the British cancellations had been a high-level political
decision. But he also warned that British prestige in the operational and
intelligence fields, which was currently high, would soon suffer ‘unless we
resume these activities ourselves’.65
    Later, under Harold Macmillan, intrusive operations using British
aircraft, ships and submarines for photography and Sigint were gradually
resumed. Moreover, between 1956 and 1960, 20 U-2 aircraft were involved
in overflights. Some U-2 flights used British bases or pilots. Most of the
deep penetration flights were launched from Adana in Turkey and six RAF
pilots were based there. Because Turkey would not allow penetration
directly into the Soviet Union, U-2s staged on to Peshawar in Pakistan
before crossing the Soviet border. Along the southern border of the Soviet
Union Soviet radar stations were more dispersed and a variety of attractive
targets presented themselves including a range of missile testing centres in
Kazakhstan, on the Caspian Sea and at Kapustin Yar on the Volga. Sites in
Kazakhstan were of particular interest because of suspicions that the Soviets
were working on anti-ballistic missiles there. Some of these flights
substituted Sigint packages for cameras, however the Sigint package that
the U-2 could carry was fairly light. Serious airborne Sigint activity of an
intrusive variety was usually carried out by the American-modified version
of the British Canberra jet, the RB-57D which, with improved engines and
a vast wing-span, could reach nearly 60,000 feet, compared with the 70,000
ft available to the U-2.66
    Even U-2 flights that were carrying out photography also served a useful
purpose for Sigint collectors, triggering intense Soviet air defence activity.
One U-2 flight launched from Bodo in Norway followed the Soviet-Polish
border before heading for the Black Sea and landing in Turkey with the
specific purpose of provoking Soviet air defence while its Elint package
logged the characteristics of radars that locked on during the journey. Over
60 Soviet fighters had been launched against this U-2 flight and it was only
a matter of time before the Soviets found a means to deal with the U-2s.67 In
1959 a RB-57D was lost returning to Taiwan after it descended too early.
The Norwegians, detecting which way the wind was blowing, resisted
pressure from the American to use northern Norway as the host for ‘Ferret’
flights against Soviet missile tests.68
    The loss of the Gary Powers U-2 aircraft occurred in May 1960. A
month later an American RB-47 ‘Ferret’ aircraft was lost over the Barents
Sea engaged in maritime surveillance, very close to Soviet airspace. The
latter aircraft had taken off from RAF Brize Norton in Britain. American
86      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

and Norwegian Sigint stations had tracked the aircraft, but disputed its
course, plotting it 30 miles and 23 miles respectively from the Soviet coast.
The aircraft crew had received orders not to go closer than 50 miles. The
Soviet coastal limit was 12 miles and the margin for error was small.69
    The twin shoot-downs reverberated in Britain in the early summer of
 1960. There was a public furore and questions in the House of Commons.
Prime Minister Macmillan was bitter when the Gary Powers shoot-down
contributed to the collapse of the East-West Summit in Paris, by which he
had set much store. The Soviet Union exploited this to the full, threatening
countries such as Britain and Japan, which hosted U-2 and RB-57D flights,
with rocket attacks against the bases from which future flights were made
over ‘Socialist’ countries. These threats were first made by the Soviet
Minister of Defence, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, on 30 May 1960 and
were reiterated on 3 June to a packed press conference by Nikita
Khrushchev himself. The JIC in London concluded that these threats were
a bluff, nevertheless they induced a new climate of extreme caution on the
part of Macmillan.70
    The impact of these events in the summer of 1960 was similar to the
Crabb affair in 1956. They served to crush a British plan for increased
airborne surveillance of the Soviet fleet that had been emerging in the weeks
and months immediately prior to the loss of the Gary Powers’s U-2 aircraft.
In early 1960 the First Sea Lord had held a meeting with the US Navy’s
Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) and agreed to an ‘increased accent on
surveillance’.71 By March 1961, British plans for increased airborne
surveillance of the Soviet fleet were put ‘into cold storage indefinitely’.72
Other long-established British programmes came to a close.
    Macmillan now required the JIC to prepare a review of all aerial
surveillance and submarine surveillance tasks so that he could assess
provisionally the value of the intelligence gained from these sorts of
activities.73 These developments contained an element of irony. In the 1950s
Britain and the United States had increasingly turned to technical means of
examining the Soviet armed forces and Soviet scientific-technical
developments, because human espionage inside the Soviet Union had
proved increasingly hazardous and, with a few exceptions, notably
unproductive. Forward technical surveillance was now proving to be less
than risk free.
    Safer alternatives certainly existed. As early as 1956 the British had
begun cultivating an alternative form of seaborne surveillance: the
possibility of gathering intelligence on the Soviet fleet from the relative
safety of British trawlers operating in northern waters. This was a direct
copy of the Soviet Sigint trawler that became ubiquitous by the 1960s. This
sort of activity was less provocative, though not without risk.74
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                           87
    Tensions between major powers often provide opportunities for minor
powers. Turkey constitutes a good example of this, for throughout the
 1950s, both British and American airborne and ground collection and
operations had made considerable use of Turkey. In 1958 an American C-
 130 Hercules Elint aircraft had been destroyed by Soviet fighters on the
border. Understandable nervousness at this had been heightened by the twin
shoot-downs of 1960. On 27 March 1961 the Turkish General Staff placed
new and severe restrictions on overflights, including a ban on approaching
the border within 100km and a height ceiling of 40,000ft. The effect was to
render Western perimeter flights for Elint purposes quite inoperable, and the
Turks knew it.
    The result was a high-level meeting attended by the Chief of the Turkish
General Staff, General Sunay; the British Chief of Defence Staff; the
American General Lemnitzer together with Captain W.D. Hodgkinson RN,
a British Sigint specialist. The Turks were extremely evasive and it was over
an hour and a half before they could bring the Turks to address the issue in
hand. Instead the visiting party had to endure long diversions designed to
avoid the matter of Sigint, while urging the assembled audience that Turkey
needed more US equipment. Eventually they broached the key issue. British
and American officers insisted that Sigint operations in Turkey were critical
in supporting nuclear strike forces and were thus of ‘vital importance to the
maintenance of the deterrent’. Prolonged bargaining ensued. General Sunay
agreed to remove the height restriction and allow flights within 50–70 km
of the border. However, the local British air attaché, who was also present,
expected the Turks to renege on the deal later warning that the Turks were
trying to exploit the recent crises. What the Turks were really after was
more American equipment for their own Sigint service and for their own
jamming units. Further protracted bargaining marked the road to resumed
operations.75


COMSEC AND GCHQ SECURITY

By the late 1950s Western signals intelligence was slowly entering a new
era. High grade ciphers, for example onetime pads, used by the major
powers, remained effectively impossible to break by the sweat of direct
cryptanalysis, if they were employed correctly. As a result, increasing
efforts were made to tap communications before they were enciphered. The
era of large-scale bugging had arrived, accelerated by the development of
transistors. Soviet efforts were revealed by the accidental location of a
microphone in the office of British Naval Attaché in Britain’s Moscow
Embassy in July 1950. The British Air Attaché, who was testing a radio
receiver, heard the voice of his colleague being broadcast loud and clear
88      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

from another part of the building. An active search ensued but, alarmingly,
the Soviets succeeded in removing the device before it could be found. In
1952 more bugs were found in the office of the American Ambassador,
George Kennan, using ‘a special British detector’. In 1956 conference
rooms in the US EUCOM Building was found to be seriously compromised
by listening devices.
    Britain had not been slow to retaliate and in October 1952 Churchill
ordered British defence scientists to begin a vigorous programme of
developing British bugs for offensive use against the Soviets. By the late
1950s this was a busy field of activity.76
    Bugging, direct tapping of landlines and the breaking of the
communications traffic of minor states, ensured a stream of signals
intelligence was routinely available to Whitehall. Little of this can be seen
in the archives today due to the nature of security procedures attending it.
Sigint material and ordinary working files never mixed. Before gaining
access to Sigint, Foreign Office officials were required to attend a day
course on Sigint security. Foreign Office staff could then go on the
circulation list for BJs – Blue Jackets – the colour of the special folders in
which Sigint material was circulated. This material was never to be referred
to in ordinary Foreign Office paperwork and always remained its special
blue jackets. BJs were circulated by special messenger, originating in the
Permanent Under Secretary’s department and always returned there after
use. There, in a small office in this Department sat the Communications
Security Officer, the workaday liaison with GCHQ. More humble files
dealing with policy and correspondence lived in the Foreign Office registry.
This hermetic separation has ensured the near invisibility of Sigint to post-
war diplomatic historians.77
    By the 1960s GCHQ found itself increasingly embattled. It needed more
resources, for it was working in a field at the cutting edge of technology and
engaged on ‘many problems on the edge of what appears to be possible’. A
large part of this strain was imposed by the growing threat to British
communications.78 London was forced to give attention to hostile Soviet
Seaborne Comint-gathering activities. Shadowing Soviet naval vessels was
unattractive, raising the possibility of an international incident, yet not to
track them was risky. In September 1964, Peter Thorneycroft, the Minister
of Defence, wrote to Prime Minster asking for permission to use naval
vessels to shadow these sorts of craft during a forthcoming NATO exercise.
This had previously been done with aircraft but during the last NATO
exercise the number of flying hours expended on this problem had been
enormous. Prime Minister Alex Douglas-Home was persuaded, partly
because the JIC had now drawn up safer guidelines for the naval shadowing
of Soviet Sigint collection vessels, known as the ‘Sampan’ rules.79
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                              89
    Prior to 1969, Comsec was not the responsibility of GCHQ, but of the
London Communications Security Agency (LCSA) with its headquarters at
8 Palmer St, in London SW1. Inevitable turf fights developed between the
well-resourced Cheltenham and its small London-based Cinderella sister.80
LCSA nevertheless enjoyed a global network, consisting of regional
Communications Security Committees, watching over British
communications. They conducted their own monitoring of British radio,
telephone and exchange links in exercises designed to simulate Soviet
efforts and find the weak points in British security.81
    Security within GCHQ itself also constituted a huge problem that was
quite different to security problems in other areas of government. Elsewhere
in government, anyone who was regarded as a possible security risk could
be gradually transferred to less sensitive areas that acted as ‘dumping
grounds’ for the unreliable. Such dumping grounds did not exist within
GCHQ. There were also union problems. Although communism was not
strong in the Britain, it was strong in certain unions, including the Electrical
Trades Union (ETU), where it had extended its grip partly through a process
of ballot-rigging. The ETU was important at GCHQ and the Americans
were alert to this sensitive issue. In 1963 the CIA completed a long report
on communism in Britain and identified Communist influence in the ETU
as one of several awkward problems.82 In the 1960s union disputes
involving civilian wireless operators at the GCHQ/DSD site at Little Sai
Wan in Hong Kong periodically halted intelligence output from that
station.83
    Even from the mid-1950s there was a gradual but deliberate drive to
reduce some the civilian components of parts of the British Sigint
programme and instead to replace them with service personnel. This was
triggered by what the authorities termed ‘an embarrassing domestic security
case’ involving the ETU at GCHQ in the spring of 1954. One result was a
decision to bring together the monitoring elements of all the various
services who contributed to GCHQ’s collection effort. This meant welding
elements of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Foreign Office radio services
into something called the Composite Signals Organisation. This allowed
better control, but suspicions about civilians remained. In the words of the
Admiralty Director of Signals it ‘clearly failed to solve the fundamental
security problem of a “Y” Service ... which is civilian manned in a
democratic country, and therefore with Trade Union affinities which no-one
can guarantee cannot be communist (vide the E.T.U)’.84
    The Navy’s Sigint collection arm, the Admiralty Civilian Shore Wireless
Service, was the only one which was entirely civilian. In the mid-1950s the
Navy drew up proposals for complete ‘navalisation’. The matter looked
problematic for some grades would be lowered as a result of ‘navalisation’
90      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

and there was bound to be trade union hostility. Accordingly the Navy
decided to move towards the objective gradually. Navalisation not only
reflected a desire to de-unionise the collection process, but also its changing
role. The Admiralty noted:
      Recent reports submitted to the London Signals Intelligence Board
      stress the increasing need to have “Y” stations close to the“Iron
      Curtain”and to increase the number of Special Operations. These
      requirements can only be met by uniformed personnel.
Some of these forward Sigint collection operations were deemed too
sensitive for details to be committed to paper, and could only be discussed
‘verbally’.85 In the late 1950s the Royal Navy had six main collection
activities. The largest was Perkar, the successor to HMS Anderson on
Ceylon, which was earmarked for rapid expansion in war. There were also
three ‘forward area’ stations that were wholly military and operated ‘under
“active service” conditions even in peace’. These were at Kiel in Germany,
in Cyprus and in Turkey. Altogether somewhere over 1,000 persons were
involved in this network.86 In March 1955, the Cabinet Security Committee
looked at the issue and decided that although there was definite security risk
involved in trade union membership it‘should be accepted’and nothing
radical should be done. The gradual drift to de-civilianisation continued, but
it was clear that it‘would take many years to achieve’.87
    The sensitive ETU issue distracted from the main security problem at
GCHQ, which was the sheer scale of positive vetting required in such a
large organisation. By the mid-1960s the problem had become worse. The
scope and scale of security measures had increased with more personnel
being subjected to positive vetting. Cogniscent of the damage inflicted on
Macmillan by the Profumo affair, Harold Wilson gave the Paymaster
General, George Wigg, the special brief of looking after government
security matters. In 1966 Wigg was asked to conduct a review of security in
the Diplomatic Service, GCHQ and the Ministry of Defence. GCHQ, he
reported, was‘autonomous to a considerable extent’and vast in size. There
were 11,500 people working on Sigint– 8,000 with GCHQ directly– and
3,500 as service personnel in the Combined Signals Organisation, working
on collection. Of those working for GCHQ half were in Cheltenham and
half‘scattered at listening stations at home and abroad’. With the exception
of a very few ancillary staff, just over 600, everyone had to be positively
vetted.
    GCHQ had a large team of 21 investigating officers, many of whom
were retired Cheltenham police officers. This was‘advantageous’as the
many of GCHQ staff at Cheltenham were recruited locally and the ex-police
had acquired ‘considerable knowledge of the background and
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                            91
 circumstances of the staff’. Despite increasing the investigating officers to
 25, Wigg conceded that‘ a backlog of positive vetting has built up’.
     There was also the problem of document security. GCHQ’s Comint
 product was tightly controlled under special procedures laid down by the
 UKUSA agreement. GCHQ policy and administrative documents were also
 closely controlled. But GCHQ’s basic‘working material’was also highly
 secret and was not catalogued in registries. In other words it was easy for
 cryptanlysts to smuggle out papers that their own specialist branches were
 working on.88
     Wigg had rightly identified security as the Achilles Heel of the vast
Western post-war Sigint organisations. Their scale, together with the
peculiar nature of their work and personnel, made effective and detailed
positive vetting of their employees all but impossible. But small numbers of
leaks or defections could do vast damage. This was endemic in a large-scale
industrial information process that ensured that large numbers of
individuals, often clerks and low-grade administrators, had access to a
highly secret product. Moreover, security chiefs complained that the nature
of the work attracted quirky individuals and attempting to spot potential
security problems by looking for unconventional individuals was a hopeless
approach. In the words of the Security Commission in 1983,‘because of the
nature of GCHQ’s work and their need for staff with esoteric specialisms,
they attracted many odd and eccentric characters’.89
    It was therefore almost inevitable that the Soviets would succeed in
recruiting individuals such a Geoffrey Prime, perhaps the Soviets’most
useful source within British signals intelligence since John Cairncross.
Geoffrey Prime, who spent much of his espionage career as an RAF
corporal doing interception work in Berlin, and never rose to a civilian rank
much above that equivalent to sergeant, was nevertheless able to do intense
damage. Moreover, despite an outspoken admiration for the Soviet Union
and all things Communist and a long history of sexual crimes, he passed
easily through five positive vettings.90 Curiously, Prime’s offer to work for
the Soviets, probably made during his time in Berlin, coincided almost
exactly with a similar offer from an American naval warrant officer, John
Walker. Walker served the Soviets for an even longer period and their
contemporaneous activities provided the Soviets with a remarkably detailed
picture of Western Sigint operations.91
    Both London and Washington had received a clear warning about the
scale of damage that could be inflicted by single individuals. Espionage by
William Weisband, a clerk in the US Army Sigint organisation called the
Army Security Agency, had revealed Venona to the Soviets in 1948 and
ended the flow of new traffic of this sort that could be broken. Weisband
also did great damage to widespread Western interception of mid-level
92       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Soviet and Eastern Bloc Sigint, such as divisional army traffic, which had
been a profitable source until 1948.
    George Blake had compromised the Berlin Tunnel before it began and
although the material taken by that operation was probably unaffected, the
duration of this operation was short.
    Then in 1960 two officials from the NSA, Martin and Mitchell, had
made an ideologically motivated defection to the Soviets. At least one of
these individuals had already been identified as having displayed deviant
behaviour, but had still been allowed to pass his vetting. After their
defection the United States informed its British signals intelligence partners
and the usual damage assessments were set in train. Although serious
damage to Sigint was expected, the British reaction to the Martin and
Mitchell affair was not over-anxious, perhaps reflecting a relief that the
defectors to the East were for once not British-employed.92
    The scale of what the Soviets discovered about Western signals
intelligence efforts during 1945–70 was considerable. This sits awkwardly
with assertions by Western Sigint organisations about the continued
sensitivity of so many of their early Cold War operations, despite the wider
context of the Open Government approach announced in the 1990s. After
the accidental discovery of Geoffrey Prime it must have been abundantly
clear to Cheltenham that some of their activities were thoroughly
understood by the Soviets. Indeed, many‘ v i t a l ’secrets of the West were
uncovered, and in some cases widely advertised, by the East at an early
stage of the Cold War. Some Western agencies continued to pretend that
these matters remained very secret when clearly they were not. This
approach is perhaps a symptom of the intense security-mindedness that
characterises work in this field. Nevertheless, the practical result has been
that British and American Sigint agencies have kept some of these things
secret only from their own domestic populations in the West.


                                           NOTES

I would like to acknowledge research leave supported by the British Academy, which helped to
support the preparation of this paper. I am indebted to many individuals for their observations,
including Matthew Aid, Ralph Erskine, David Stafford, Cees Wiebes and John W. Young. Errors
remain the responsibility of the author.

 1. Philip Davies, The British Secret Services: A Bibliography (Oxford: Clio 1996). Some of the
    literature of GCHQ after 1945 includes: Patrick Fitzgerald and Mark Leopold, Stranger on
    the Line: The Secret History of Phone Tapping (London: The Bodley Head 1987); Nigel
    West, GCHQ: The Secret Wireless War, 1900–86 (London: Weidenfeld 1986); Richard
    Aldrich and Michael Coleman,‘The Cold War, the JIC and British Signals Intelligence,
    1948’, Intelligence and National Security 4/3 (July 1989) pp.535–49; Andy Thomas,‘British
    Signals Intelligence After the Second World War’, Intelligence and National Security 3/4
    (Oct. 1988) pp.103–10.
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                                           93
        Much of the important writing about GCHQ is submerged within wider accounts of
    global networks. See in particular: James Bamford, The Puzzle Palace: America’s National
    Security Agency and Its Special Relationship with GCHQ (London: Sidgwick 1983); Jeffrey
    Richelson and Desmond Ball, Ties that Bind: Intelligence Cooperation Between the UKUSA
    Countries (Boston: Allen and Unwin 1985); Olaf Riste, The Norwegian Intelligence Service,
    1945–70 (London and Portland, OR: Frank Cass 1999); Bradley F. Smith, The Ultra Magic
    Deals and the Most Secret Special Relationship, 1940-1946 (Shrewsbury: Airlife 1993);
    Christopher Andrew,‘TheGrowth of the Australian Intelligence Community and the Anglo-
    American Connection’, Intelligence and National Security 4/2 (April 1989) pp.213–57;
    Christopher Andrew,‘The Making of the Anglo-American SIGINT Alliance’, in H.B. Peake
    and S. Halperin, In the Name of Intelligence (Washington DC: NIBC Press 1994); Desmond
    Ball,‘Over and Out: Signals Intelligence (Sigint) in Hong Kong’, Intelligence and National
    Security 11/3 (July 1996) pp.474–96; W. Wark,‘Cryptographic Innocence: The Origins of
    Signals Intelligence in Canada in the Second World War’, Journal of Contemporary History
    22 (1997) pp.639–65.
 2. Wigg to Wilson enclosing‘The Organisation of Security in the Diplomatic Service and
    Government Communications Headquarters’, 17 Aug. 1966, PREM 13/1203, PRO.
 3. LSIB Mtgs. Summary No.13, 18 July 1945, WO 203/5126, PRO.
 4. Welchman, Hinsley and Crankshaw to Travis,‘ A Note on the Future of G.C. & C.S.’, 17
    Sept. 1944, HW 3/169, PRO. On Slim, see Richard J. Aldrich, Intelligence and the War
    Against Japan: Britain, America and the Politics of Secret Service (Cambridge: Cambridge
    UP 2000) pp.316–17.
 5. Part 1,‘The General Problem of Intelligence and Security in Peace’, (personal for Director),
    Preliminary Draft, Sept. 1944, HW 3/169, PRO.
 6. Bamford, Puzzle Palace (note 1) 317, 335.
 7. Clarke,‘Post War Organisation’, HW 3/30. I am indebted to Ralph Erskine for this reference.
 8. Aldrich and Coleman,‘The Cold War, the JIC and British Signals Intelligence’(note 1)
    pp.538–40; F.H. Hinsley et al., British Intelligence in the Second World War (London:
    HMSO 1980) II, pp.618–19.
 9. P. Whitaker and L. Kruh,‘From Bletchley Park to the Berchtesgarten’, Cryptologia 11/3
    (1987) pp.l29–20.
10. ‘The German G-2 Service in the Russian Campaign’, 22 July 1945, WO 208/4343, PRO.
11. Van der Meulen, ‘Cryptologic Services of the Federal Republic’, paper to the German
    Intelligence Studies Conference, Tutzing, 1999, and private information.
12. Sheridan Russell, Sheridan’s Story, 1900–1991 (privately published 1993).
13. L. Donini,‘ T h e Cryptographic Services of the Royal (British) and Italian Navies’,
    Cryptologia 14/3 (1990) pp.97–127.
14. AFHQ to MI8 London, 10 July 1945,‘SID Cryptographic Documents’, WO 208/5073, PRO.
    Also AFHQ to MI8 London,‘Diplomatic Interception in Northern Italy’, 16 May 1945, and
    Annex,‘SIM Success on British and US Diplo’, ibid.
15. McKane to DDY,‘Italian Sigint Service’, 15 May 1946, ibid..
16. McKane to Director LSIC (for Head of TA Group), 31 May 1946, enclosing‘Further notes
    on Italian Cover’, ibid.
17. McKane to K.H. Sachse, (LSIC),‘Italian Intercept Organisation’, 4 June 1946, ibid.
18. Y Services Summary, Dec. 1995 and March 1946, WO 212/228, PRO.
19. R. Lewin, Ultra goes to War (London: Hutchinson 1978) pp.129–33; R.V. Jones, Reflections
    on Intelligence (London: Heinemann 1989) p.15.
20. JIC (48)(0)(second revised draft),‘Sigint intelligence requirements’1948, 11 May 1948,
    LAVS/1196, IOLR.
21. A. Stripp, Codebreaker in the Far East (London: Frank Cass 1988) pp.50–60; Jones,
    Reflections (note 19) pp.14–16.
22. Thomas,‘British Signals Intelligence’(note 1) pp.103–4.
23. Ibid. pp.106, John Sawatsky, For Services Rendered (Markham, Canada: Penguin 1983)
     pp.23–4.
24. Ball,‘Over and O u t ’(note 1) pp.32–44; Thomas,‘British Signals Intelligence’(note 1)
    p.107; Sawatsky, For Services Rendered (note 23) pp.25–6.
94        SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

25. Eubank (COS) to Rowlands (MoS), 31 Jan. 1952, DEFE 11/350; Eubank to DRPC, 31 Jan.
      1952, ibid.
26. COS (52) 152nd mtg. (1) Confidential Annex, 4 Nov. 1952, DEFE 11/350, PRO.
27. Christopher. Andrew, For the President’s Eyes Only: American Presidents and Intelligence
     From Washington to Bush (London: HarperCollins 1999) pp.156–63.
28. Entry for 21 Nov. 1945, Cunningham and diary, MSS 52578, British Library; Wark,
    ‘Cryptographic Innocence’ (note 1) pp.558–9; Andrew, President’s Eyes Only (note 27) p.161.
29. Andrew,‘Australian Intelligence Community’(note 1) pp.223–5; Bamford, Puzzle Palace
     (note 1) pp.314–17; Richelson and Ball, Ties that Bind (note 1) pp.141–5.
30. Wark, Cryptographic Innocence’(note 1) pp.639–5; Sawatsky, For Services Rendered (note
     23) p.29. I am much indebted to the guidance of Matthew Aid on these matters.
31. Brigadier General USAF, Acting Director of Intelligence, Walter R. Agee, to US Coordinator
     of Joint Operations, 7 June 1948,‘Proposed U.S.-Canadian Agreement’, USAF D of I
     records, File 2-1200/2-1299, Box 40, RG 341, USNA.
32. Matthew Aid,‘US Humint and Comint in the Korean War: From the Approach of War to the
     Chinese Intervention’, Intelligence and National Security 14/4 (Winter 1999) pp.15–50.
33. A-2 to Naval Communications Annex,‘Request for British Comintsum Publications, 19
     March 1948, 21450, Box 41, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA.
34. Cabell to Air Police Division, 28 April 1948, 21200, Box 40, USAF D of I records, RG 341,
     USNA.
35. Riste, Norwegian Intelligence Service (note 1) pp.95–7; R. Tamnes, The US and the Cold
     War in the High North (Aldershot: Dartmouth 1991) pp.76–7.
36. UKHC Ceylon to Defence Dept., 21 April 1950, DO 35/2418, PRO.
37. Mtg at the Admiralty, 26 Oct. 1951, ibid.
38. Mtg No.80, 17 Jan. 1951, PSF – NSC meetings, Box 211, Harry S. Truman Library.
39. Ackerman to D of I, 21 Sept. 1951, 219900, Box 58, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA.
40. Young (USAF) to Coordinator USCIB,‘Site Requirement’, 15 July 1952, 224100-, Box 66,
     USAF D of I records, RG 341, USAF.
41. Samford (D of I USAF) to Twining, 6 Aug. 1952, 224400, Box 66, USAF D of I records, RG
     341, USNA.
42. Brief on Fifth Report to the President by PBCFIA (Recommendation concerning Fusion of
    Comint-Elint Activities), 11 March 1960, File: 1960 Meetings with the President Vol. 1 (5),
    Box 4, Presidential Subseries, Special Assistant Series, OSANA, WHO, Dwight D.
    Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas.
43. US JCS decision on J.C.S. 2074/14, A Report by the Chairman, US Armed Forces Security
    Agency Council on‘Security of the Combined Cipher Machine’, 19 May 1952, Note by the
    Secretaries, Papers of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1951-3 CCS 311 (1-10-42) Sec.14, RG 218,
    USNA.
44. ‘Results of US-UK Conference in London on Comint Service to SHAPE and its Subordinate
    Commands’, 23 Dec. 1952, 3-1, Box 70, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA.
45. ‘Memorandum from Colonel Fergusson to General Gruenther’, B. Fergusson, Hubble-
    Bubble (London: Collins 1978) pp.54–6.
46. R.V. Jones, The Wizard War. British Scientific Intelligence 1939–1945 (NY: Coward,
    McCann and Geoghegan 1978) p.92.
47. SEAC Noise Investigation Bureau report for May 1945, WO 203/4089, PRO.
48. Captain Wenger, US Navy Coordinator of Joint Operations, to Colonel R.P. Klocko, USAF,
    CJO 0001922, 12 March 1948, Memo:‘British proposal for liaison on“noise investigation”’,
    USAF D of I records, File 2-1100/2-1199, Box 40, RG 341, USNA.
49. McMurtie (JSM), to Moore (Pentagon), 20 Nov. 1948, File 2-8300– 2-8399, USAF D of I
    records, RG 341, USNA.
50. Partridge Memorandum,‘Northern European Ferret Flights’, 20 Aug. 1947, File 2-800– 2-
    899, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA.
51. I am indebted to Matthew Aid’s forthcoming study of US Sigint for this point.
52. Air Technical Center, Air Technical Intelligence Study No.l02-EL-23/51-54: Radio
    Frequency Transmissions, July–Sept. 1950, File 2-20944, USAF D of I records, RG 341,
    USNA.
GCHQ AND SIGINT                                                                          95
53. Tamnes, High North (note 35) p.77.
54. Ibid. pp.50–2.
55. Air Technical Intelligence Study,‘Soviet Electronic Countermeasures’, 10 June 1951, 20034,
    Box 149, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA; Air Technical Intelligence Study,‘Soviet
     Air Communications’, 12 July 1951, 20032, ibid.
56. Tamnes, High North (note 35) pp.116–17.
57. D of I USAF to US Air Attaché London,‘Liaison with GCHQ’, 26 Oct. 1952, 235700, Box
     68, USAF D of I records, RG 341, USNA.
58. AFOIN-T to D of I USAF, 16 April 1952, 223200, Box 64, USAF D of I records, RG 341,
     USAF.
59. R.R. James, Anthony Eden (London: Weidenfeld 1986) pp.436–7.
60. Eden to Bridges, M.104.56, 9 May 1956, AP20/32/78, Avon Papers, Birmingham University
     Library (BUL).
61. Prime Minister, Anthony Eden, to Minster of Defence, Antony Head, 22 Dec. 1956,
     AP20/21/228, Avon Papers, BUL.
62. Richard M. Bissell Jr, Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to the Bay of Pigs (New
     Haven, CT: Yale UP 1996) pp.115–16.
63. Elkins (BJSM) to Mountbatten, 16 Oct. 1956, ADM 205/110, PRO.
64. Inglis (DNI) to Flag Officer, Submarines, 19 Oct. 1956, ibid; Coote, USS Stickleback report,
     ibid.
65. Elkins (BJSM) to Mountbatten, 31 Dec. 1956, ibid.
66. Mikesh, Canberra, B-57 (Shepperton: Ian Allan 1980) XX; G. Pedlow and D. Welzenbach,
     The CIA and the U-2 Program, 1954–74 (Washington DC: CIA 1998) pp.9–51; Tamnes,
     High North (note 35) pp.128–9.
67. Ibid. pp.128–9; Bissell, Reflections (note 62) p.121.
68. Tamnes, High North (note 35) pp.123-5.
69. S. Ambrose, Eisenhower the President, Vol. 2, 1952–59 (London: Allen and Unwin 1984) p.584.
70. The JIC paper was JIC (60) 43 (Final),‘Soviet Threats Against Reconnaissance Flight Bases
     Following the U-2 Incident’, and is summarised in DEFE 13/342, PRO.
71. Minutes,‘Surveillance Meeting’, 26 April 1960, 16/W/160, ADM 1/27680, PRO.
72. Minute by Head of Military Branch II, 10 March 1961, ibid.
73. Memo from PS to VCAS to PS to S. of S.,‘Aircraft Approach Restrictions– Operation
     TIARA/GARNET’, Oct. 1960, AIR 20/12222, PRO. The JIC paper prepared for Macmillan
     was JIC (60) 62 (Revised), 1 Sept. 1960.
 74. On continuing British submarine intelligence operations in the 1960s see Riste, Norwegian
     Intelligence Service (note 1) pp.228.
 75. Mtg between Chief of Turkish Gen Staff, 25 April 1961 recorded by Capt. Hodgkinson,
      DEFE 25/11, PRO.
 76. Richard S. Aldrich, Espionage, Security and Intelligence in Britain 1945–1970: Documents
     in Contemporary History (Manchester UP 1998) pp.147–9. See also Radford (JCS) memo,
     ‘Clandestine Listening Devices’, 6 April 1956, file: Presidential papers 1956 (8), Box 3,
      Presidential subseries, Special Assistant Series, OSANA, WHO, Dwight D Eisenhower
      Memorial Library.
 77. Private information.
 78. Memo to the RSB,‘Government Communications Headquarters’, from GCHQ (GCHQ
      Ref.M/8087/100/1) 11 Feb. 1960, WO 195/14887, PRO. I am indebted to Rob Evans for
      drawing this document to my attention.
 79. Thorneycroft to Douglas-Home, 12 Sept. 1964, DEFE 13/403, PRO; Jellicoe to Butler, 11
      Sept. 1964, ibid.
 80. Penney (LCSA) to Howes, 16 Oct. 1957, I– 1516, Mountbatten Papers, Hartley Library
      Special Collections, Univ. of Southampton.
 81. COS (61) 466, Annex II,‘Communications Security Committee Middle East’, AIR 19/1101,
      PRO.
 82. CIA, Special Report– Office of Current Intelligence,‘The British Communist Party’, OCI
      No. 275638, File UK General, 1963, Box 171, NSF Files, John F. Kennedy Memorial
      Library, Boston.
96       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

83. Ball,‘Over and Out’(note 1) p.482.
84. Lenox-Conygham (DSD), minute, 19 Nov. 1954, ADM 1/26478, PRO.
85. Head of CE. Branch IV, 15 Feb. 1955, ibid.; Lenox-Conygham (DSD), 25 Feb. 1955, ibid.
86. YWP (P) 12, July 1955, ibid..
87. Head of CE. Branch IV minute, 2 April 1955, ibid.
88. Paymaster General, George Wigg, to Prime Minster Harold Wilson enclosing‘ T h e
    Organisation of Security in the Diplomatic Service and Government Communications
    Headquarters’, 17 Aug. 1966, PREM 13/1203, PRO. This document is reproduced and
    discussed in J. Young,‘George Wigg, The Wilson Government and the 1966 Report into
    Security in the Diplomatic Service and GCHQ’, Intelligence and National Security 14/3
    (Autumn 1999) pp.198–209.
89. Quoted in D.J. Cole, Geoffrey Prime (London: Robert Hale 1995) p.64.
90. Cole, Prime, pp.54–76.
91. The most incisive assessment is offered in C Andrew and O. Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside
    Story (London: Hodder 1990) pp.438–43.
92. Strong (JIB) to Minster of Defence, Harold Watkinson, 29 Aug. 1960, DEFE 13/9, PRO.
    Also private information.
                                     4
       Canada’s Communications Security
         Establishment from Cold War
                to Globalization

                        MARTIN RUDNER



The Communications Security Establishment (CSE) is Canada’s largest
and costliest intelligence organization and the main provider of foreign
intelligence to the Canadian government.1 It is, arguably, also the
most secretive component of the Government of Canada. For decades
the very existence of CSE was unconfirmed, it has no statutory mandate,
and virtually all details of its resources, objectives and operations are
still shrouded in official secrecy.2 What is known is that CSE collects,
analyses and reports on signals intelligence (referred to as Sigint) derived
from interceptions of foreign electronic communications, radio, radar,
telemetry, and other electromagnetic emissions. In fulfilment of these
foreign intelligence functions, CSE participates in international
collaboration and exchanges as part of a special Sigint sharing arrangement
with the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. CSE
is also responsible for providing technical advice and guidance for
protecting Canadian government communications and electronic data
security.
     CSE is a civilian agency of Canada’s Department of National Defence
(DND). Ministerial responsibility for CSE is vested in the Minister of
National Defence, however in a unique bifurcation of executive authority,
administrative and operational controls are divided between DND and the
Privy Council Office (PCO), the federal government’s central agency,
headed by the Prime Minister. Administrative and financial matters are
under the control of DND, through the Deputy Minister of National
Defence, its most senior official, whereas policy and operational controls
over CSE are exercised by the Deputy Secretary, Security and Intelligence
in PCO. At the policy level, the direction and co-ordination of Canada’s
intelligence effort involves a complex web of PCO secretariats and
inter-departmental committees.3
98       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    At the operational level, the actual staffing of Canada’s Sigint
interception land sites is undertaken not by CSE as such, but by specialized
military detachments of the Canadian Forces Information Operations
Group (CFIOG), working under the overall direction of CSE. CFIOG
deploys about 1,000 personnel, mainly military Communications Research
Operators (known colloquially as‘291ers’), at Canadian Forces Base
Leitrim (near Ottawa), also service the remote stations at Alert, Gander and
Masset. An exchange arrangement with the United States has some 25
291ers posted to US Navy stations in California, Hawaii and Texas, while
a similar number of American personnel are attached to the Leitrim
facility.4
    During the Cold War the Canadian signals intelligence effort was
directed primarily at the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies. That lent
Canada’s foreign intelligence requirements a certain stability and
predictability.5 Following the collapse of Communism in Europe and the
end of the Cold War, however, CSE found itself impelled to alter the scope
and direction of its activities in response to shifting perceptions of the threat
environment confronting Canada. A more variegated and volatile security
situation had a far-reaching impact on Canadian foreign intelligence

                                      FIGURE 4.1




Canadian Communications Security Establishment HQ buildings in Ottawa.
                                                Communications Security Establishment, Canada
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                             99
requirements. Thus, in 1991, for the first time ever, the federal Cabinet
issued a directive on foreign intelligence priorities.6
    The study that follows traces the historical evolution of CSE in
performing its signals intelligence functions from the Cold War to this more
diverse and globalized security agenda. Given the sensitivity of Sigint
issues, this study relies on open sources.

THE B E G I N N I N G S OF C A N A D I A N SIGINT

Canada has never had a consolidated, dedicated foreign intelligence service,
unlike most of its allies. Historically, Canadian requirements for foreign
intelligence have been addressed through an array of functionally
differentiated agencies, most of which were linked to international
intelligence sharing arrangements. Canada’s involvement in Sigint began
prior to the Second World War, when the Royal Canadian Navy put in place
a monitoring station on the West Coast to supply raw intercepts to the
British Admiralty. During the war the Army, Navy and Air Force set up
their own respective signals intelligence units in collaboration with their
British counterparts.7 These separate Sigint units were later combined into a
so-called‘Joint Discrimination Unit’.
    Meanwhile a civilian entity, styled the‘Examination Unit’, had been
established in 1941 to provide communications intelligence and
cryptanalysis, primarily of diplomatic traffic, for the Department of
External Affairs (as it was then). In April 1946, Prime Minister MacKenzie
King approved the creation of a peacetime communications intelligence
organization, and in September of that year the existing military and civilian
units were merged to become the Communications Branch of the National
Research Council (CBNRC).8 In 1975 the functions of CBNRC were
relocated in their entirety to DND, and reconstituted as the Communications
Security Establishment.
    No statutory framework for CSE (or its predecessor) was ever put in
place. In fact, for virtually all this period the very existence of a Canadian
signals intelligence capability was itself an official secret.
    While the decision to create a peacetime Canadian Sigint capability
preceded the onset of the Cold War, the looming confrontation with an
expansionist Soviet Union gave a powerful impetus to this incipient foreign
intelligence initiative. As it happened, a coincidence of events around the
pivotal years 1945–49 underscored the strategic value of signals
intelligence in the Cold War context. In 1945, a cipher clerk in the USSR
embassy in Ottawa, Igor Gouzenko, defected, bringing with him
documentary evidence of a Soviet espionage network.9 Although there is
nothing to indicate that the Gouzenko defection impacted directly on
100      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                 FIGURE 4.2




Enigma cipher machine.
                                          Communications Security Establishment, Canada



Canadian Sigint operations, the accompanying cipher material itself
underscored the potential role for signals intelligence in the defence of
Canadian and allied security.10
    Meanwhile, in 1946, US codebreakers succeeded in deciphering
previously intercepted Soviet KGB signals. This operation, code named
‘Venona’, paved the way for future Sigint attacks on Soviet diplomatic,
military, and intelligence communications.11 In so far as just knowing the
capabilities of communications intelligence can suffice to give warning of
target vulnerability, these Sigint organizations, technologies and operations
were generally treated as matters of utmost secrecy.
     By then, the senior echelons of the Canadian foreign policy and defence
establishment would have become aware of the wartime contributions of
‘Ultra’ and ‘Magic’, the British and American Sigint breakthroughs against
German and Japanese diplomatic and military communications,
respectively.12 They certainly knew of the ongoing British and American
initiatives to develop new modalities for post-war cooperation in
communications intelligence. Early on, in October 1945, the British Sigint
organization, then styled as the Government Code and Cipher School
(GC&CS), predecessor of what became in 1946 the Government
Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), approached the Canadian
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                              101

authorities to solicit their participation in a combined Anglo-American
communications intelligence initiative that would involve a complete
sharing of intercepts.
    Aware that they could not achieve global Sigint coverage by themselves,
the British sought to divide the world into tripartite spheres of cooperation,
but asked that Canada permit Britain to represent its interests in negotiations
with the United States. It is noteworthy that, at the time, GC&CS conceived
of the tripartite agreement as involving just military and clandestine radio
traffic but not diplomatic interceptions. The Canadian Joint Intelligence
Committee (CJIC) agreed to cooperate and mandated Britain to negotiate
with the Americans on Canada’s behalf.13 In March 1946, an British-US
Agreement (BRUSA) was concluded on communications intelligence
sharing, which also embraced Canada.14
    Prior to the 1960s, most international (and long-distance domestic)
telecommunications traffic everywhere in the world was carried by high
frequency (HF) radio networks. This HF infrastructure served for
telephones and telegraph, and diplomatic and military messaging. Since HF
radio signals achieve their long range by bouncing between the ionosphere
and earth’s surface, they are vulnerable to interception as well as reception.
HF radio signals can be readily intercepted with specialized antennae which
can simultaneously monitor as many frequencies from as many bearings as
may be desired, requiring only a suitable parcel of land in, ideally, a ‘quiet’
radio environment. Canada’s geographic location provided particularly
advantageous situations for intercepting HF communications across the
northern regions of the USSR and East Asia and the adjacent waters of the
Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic oceans.
    After the Second World War, Canada, like Britain and the United States,
shut down most of the Sigint listening posts that had been set up in wartime.
While the Leitrim site near Ottawa was kept operational, most other
Canadian interception facilities and Royal Canadian Navy radio intercept
and high-frequency direction-finding (HF-DF) stations were closed or
returned to the Department of Transport.
    Prompted by the BRUSA agreement, from 1946 a network of
interception facilities was set up across Canada to cover gaps in the tripartite
arrangement with Britain and the United States. Existing facilities at
Leitrim, Coverdale (New Brunswick), and Prince Rupert (British
Columbia) were expanded, and new intercept sites were established at
Whitehorse in the Yukon, Churchill on the Hudson Bay in northern
Manitoba, and Ladner, near Victoria (British Columbia). The Whitehorse
facility, activated in 1948, intercepted Soviet and other Asian radio traffic;
Churchill, opened the same year, copied Soviet radio traffic across the
Arctic; and Ladner provided coverage of the Soviet Far East.15
 102       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     By the 1950s CBNRC was monitoring Soviet air force and air defence
communications across the northern USSR from ten small radio intercept
 stations operated by the Royal Canadian Navy (Aklavik, Churchill,
Coverdale, Frobisher Bay on Baffin Island; Gander, Newfoundland; Masset,
British Columbia), Army Corps of Signals (Alert, Northwest Territories;
Ladner, Leitrim) and Royal Canadian Air Force (Whitehorse).16
     In addition, a small network of HF-DF stations was created out of
reactivated wartime posts and new naval installations at Aklavik (Northwest
Territories), Masset (British Columbia) and Coverdale. These HF-DF
stations were fully integrated into the Atlantic and Pacific HF-DF networks
of the US Naval Security Group, while communications intelligence was
channelled through CBNRC.
     Building upon the tripartite arrangement under the 1946 BRUSA
Agreement, a Canada-US Communications Intelligence Agreement
(CANUSA) was concluded in May 1948, which, inter alia, established
parameters for bilateral exchanges of communications intelligence albeit on
a rather more limited basis than did the BRUSA arrangement. Be that as it
may, this Agreement provided the impetus for Canada to further extend its
involvement in alliance Sigint activities. By the late 1940s, Canada had


                                         FIGURE 4.3




Canadian Army Corps of Signals Sigint intercept station at Alert, Northwest Territories.
                                                     Communications Security Establishment, Canada
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                           103

emerged as a modest but important source of strategically valuable signals
intelligence on the Soviet Union and East Asia.
    Canada’s collaboration with allied Sigint efforts, which was
subsequently expanded into the wider ranging UKUSA alliance
(see below), was valued not so much for this country’s inherent
capabilities in Sigint or its contributions to intelligence production
generally, as for its geographic advantage in providing communications
intelligence coverage of the Soviet Union, especially its Arctic and
Far Eastern regions. Indeed, Canada’s Sigint allies would have cause to
lament Canada’s meagre capacity to offer exchanges of intelligence
product.17 Nevertheless, Canadian geography made up for the otherwise
lamentable‘terms of trade’. By November 1957, CBNRC had given up its
attempts at machine cryptanalysis, reducing Canada’s role to that of a mere
supplier of raw intercepts to its more highly capable, better equipped Sigint
allies.

CANADA’S SIGINT C O L L E C T I O N EFFORT

Up to the present most of the foreign intelligence provided to the
Canadian government by virtue of Canada’s own intelligence collection
capabilities derives from signals intelligence provided by CSE.
Canadian Sigint operations collect intelligence by means of sophisticated,
covert interception technologies designed to intercept terrestrial,
microwave, radio, and satellite communications along with other
electromagnetic emissions. These intercepts are then processed through
technologically advanced computer systems programmed to search for
specific telephone numbers, voice recognition patterns, or key words, and
to decrypt text.
    Canada also has access to Sigint collected by its allies in the UKUSA
signals intelligence alliance (see below). This unique alliance links
Canada’s CSE to the United States, through its National Security Agency
(NSA); the United Kingdom, through GCHQ; Australia, through its
Defence Signals Directorate (DSD); and New Zealand, through the
Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB). The UKUSA
alliance provides CSE with a shared global capacity to collect and deliver
real-time Sigint intercepts on targeted objectives to selected clients within
the Government of Canada.
    The clandestine and broadly intrusive function of Sigint has had
important implications for political control and accountability, oversight
and legal compliance relating to the privacy of Canadians. Ultimate political
control over intelligence in the Canadian parliamentary system is vested in
the Prime Minister. As head of government, the Prime Minister bears
104     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

overall responsibility for Canada’s national security and the safeguarding of
the country’s territorial integrity.
    Parliament has traditionally played a very limited role in regard to
foreign intelligence generally since most detailed information on budgets,
operations and the performance of the organizations concerned, including
CSE, must necessarily remain classified. However, along with all other
Canadian government departments and agencies, CSE and other
components of the intelligence community are subject to scrutiny and
review by the Auditor-General of Canada, the Canadian Human Rights
Commission, the Privacy Commissioner, and the Information
Commissioner, as well as the courts.
    In 1996, the government took a step towards creating a more public
accountability framework for CSE by appointing a CSE Commissioner with
a mandate to review and report upon its activities in order to determine their
compliance with the law. Assurances have been given repeatedly in
ministerial pronouncements and in reports of review agencies like the
Privacy Commissioner and CSE Commissioner to the effect that Canadian
Sigint operations respect the laws of privacy and do not intentionally target
Canadians or monitor their domestic private communications. Nevertheless,
there is some deliberate ambiguity as to the extent to which interceptions of
foreign targets may incidentally capture communications to or from
Canadians.
    The methods utilized to intercept targeted local communications are
obviously highly sensitive. There are several ways in which local in-country
interception operations could have been mounted. What is noteworthy is
that CSE shared some of the technologies of its UKUSA partner
organizations that enabled them to surreptitiously intercept telephonic or
digital communications, sift them for messages to or from targeted
individuals or organizations, and decrypt the enciphered content.
    Cryptanalysis represented a vital part of Canada s early Sigint collection
effort. At the outset, CBNRC provided the mathematical and cryptological
skills to decipher intercepted Soviet bloc communications. However by the
late 1950s this cryptanalytical effort had to be mostly abandoned.18
Historians claim that no Soviet diplomatic communications were ever
decrypted after‘Venona’, because of KGB penetrations of NSA and GCHQ
thwarted subsequent codebreaking efforts.19
    Over the next two decades Canadian signals intelligence was but
minimally involved in serious cryptanalysis. What was done was mostly
undertaken manually, as few computer resources were deployed in Canada’s
Sigint effort. It was only in the early 1980s that one of CSE’s IBM 370
mainframes was made available for cryptanalysis, even though NSA was
reportedly doubtful whether this computer could generate results.
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                           105

Nevertheless, CSE was now able to break into certain cipher keys that
yielded up intelligence to Canadian requirements. Yet, by the time this
system achieved a minimal capacity for codebreaking, around spring 1981,
CSE cryptanalysts were already acknowledging that more powerful
computational technologies would be required for operational
effectiveness.20

C O L D WAR SIGINT OPERATIONS

Canadian signals intelligence operations during and after the Cold War
may be considered in terms of four types of interception, in accordance
with the location and technologies deployed. Local in-country interception
operations were mounted within Canada, targeting communications to or
from this country. External interception operations targeted
communications in foreign countries from Canadian diplomatic posts.
Long-range operations targeted communications and electromagnetic
emissions abroad from interception facilities in Canada. Later, specialized
facilities were installed to also monitor satellite communications links. The
primary targets for each of these types of interception during the Cold War
were the diplomatic, military and espionage communications of Soviet
Bloc countries. Other countries’communications were also sometimes
targeted.
    Local Sigint operations mounted within Canada during the Cold War
targeted mainly the Soviet Bloc diplomatic and consular missions, trade and
commercial offices, and organizations and individuals suspected of
involvement in espionage or subversion.21 Canadians were also intercepting
the radio transmissions from Soviet research stations in the Arctic, allowing
intelligence analysts to monitor their scientific experiments.22 No official
confirmation of these sensitive operations was ever forthcoming. A 1956
operation (‘Dew Worm’) to secrete listening devices in the Soviet embassy
in Ottawa was a failure, as was another attempt to penetrate the Polish
consulate in Montreal (Operation‘Satyr’).23
    The Soviets returned the compliment by way of surreptitiously installing
radio-intercept posts in their KGB residencies in Ottawa and Montreal to
monitor Canadian communications. Moreover, the KGB radio-intercept
post in New York succeeded in intercepting communications traffic
between the Canadian permanent mission to the United Nations and
Department of External Affairs.24
    In parallel with these local and external operations Canadian signals
intelligence also undertook long-distance Sigint intercepts from interception
stations in Canada. Long-distance HF radio intercepts enabled Canada and
its allies to eavesdrop on internal Soviet (and other Warsaw Pact) military,
106     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

naval, rocket force and air force communications networks across the
Arctic. These Soviet Bloc armed forces HF radio networks were generally
less well protected than political-level and diplomatic communications, and
could be intercepted and processed with contemporary technologies. Sigint
interceptions of HF communications played a key role in that strategically
vital polar theatre by way of providing distant early warning of the Soviet
order of battle and potential first strike capability, intelligence of primary
significance during the Cold War for the defence of Canada and North
America.
    By the mid-1970s, however, the USSR seemed better able to effectively
protect its high-level communications against interception.25 By then
Canadian Sigint operations were also targeting other perceived threats to
Canada’s national security and territorial integrity. Among the countries
now targeted were those whose foreign policy behaviour was considered
inimical to Canada and its allies, and those whose embassies or
representatives were suspected of engaging in illegitimate political
activities, inappropriate dealings with Canadian residents, support for
subversive or terrorist groups, or illicit arms procurements. With the
election of a separatist government in the Province of Quebec, CSE
allegedly began monitoring communications traffic between the
governments of Quebec and France, according to disclosures by a
disaffected former employee.26 Such operations were ostensibly mounted by
CSE itself, some say with support from Sigint allies in Norway and the
United States.
     Canadian and allied Sigint interceptions of in-country Soviet
communications helped to fill the information void in these otherwise
 closed, secretive, unfriendly regimes. Information needed simply to
 manage bilateral relations, or to assess international behaviour and risks,
 which in other societies would have been open source, could only be
 acquired in the context of Soviet secretiveness by intelligence means.
 Sigint interceptions of local communications was one of the most effective,
 least risky, means of penetrating the Iron Curtain of secrecy. Soviet
 countermeasures were deployed in the 1970s to frustrate Sigint operations
 run from the US Embassy. It was suspected that the electromagnetic
 radiation may have caused the American ambassador to become ill with
 leukaemia, but this fear was later allayed.27 There is no indication that any
 Canadians were affected by countermeasures against the listening post in
 the Canadian Embassy.
     During the 1970s CSE, acting at behest of NSA, began mounting
 external interception operations from Canadian diplomatic posts abroad
 in an operation codenamed‘Pilgrim’. Microwave systems in most
 countries converge on their capital cities, rendering some of their
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                          107

most sensitive communications traffic vulnerable to embassy-based
interception operations. Embassy-based Sigint stations were also effective
for intercepting official car phone communications transmitted
by short-range radio. External communications interceptions provided, at
the time, a unique aperture into in-country telecommunications.28
State-of-the art communications monitoring and processing equipment
was supplied by NSA, which also trained Canadian personnel and guided
the targeting.
     This equipment, and the personnel, were surreptitiously located in
certain Canadian embassies and consulates. The first such interception
operation,‘Stephanie’, was mounted from the Canadian embassy in
Moscow beginning in the autumn of 1972, and ran for about three years.29
A subsequent operation,‘Sphinx’, was run in the late 1980s. The first
permanent intercept site was reportedly established in 1983 at the Canadian
High Commission in New Delhi, as Operation‘Daisy’.30
    Among the other capital cities where Canada is said to have run
external Sigint collection operations from diplomatic or consular posts
were Abidjan (‘Jasmine’), Beijing (‘Badger’), Bucharest (‘Hollyhock’),
Rabat (‘Iris’), Kingston, Jamaica (‘Egret’), Mexico City (‘Cornflower’),
Rome, San José (Costa Rica), Warsaw and possibly Tokyo. All the
intelligence collected by Canadian embassy-based interceptions was
actually remitted to NSA for deciphering and analysis, since at the time
Canada lacked a capacity to do this. It was ironical that for the want of
cryptanalytical capability Canada was unable to process the take from its
own external Sigint collection efforts, but had to rely on partners for this
intelligence product.
    In the early 1980s Canadian Sigint was even targeting non-security
related economic targets of opportunity as part of Operation ‘Aquarian’
aimed at foreign embassies and consulates, even those of friendly or indeed
allied countries. CSE intercepts were said to have been instrumental in
enabling Canada to out-compete the United States in a US$5 billion wheat
sale to China in 1981.31
    Although the NSA partially funded the modernization of Canadian
communications interception facilities in the 1960s, the number of stations
was reduced to just six by the early 1970s. Frobisher Bay, Whitehorse,
Churchill, Coverdale and Ladner were all closed down. A new station was
activated in Inuvik (to replace Aklavik, closed in 1961), Northwest
Territories, and a naval HF-DF station was opened in Bermuda in 1963.
Following the transfer of Sigint responsibilities to CSE in 1975, a complex
of specialized Sigint antennae and processing stations was constructed at
Leitrim, Alert, Gander, Whitehorse (now closed) and Masset, staffed with
military personnel from what is today the Canadian Forces Information
108     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Operations Group.32 By the late 1990s the interception stations at Alert,
Gander and Masset were fully automated and would henceforward be
remotely controlled from the central CSE collection facility at Leitrim.

CANADA AND THE UKUSA AGREEMENT
Canadian involvement in an international Sigint alliance structure began in
stages between 1946 and 1948 with separate arrangements with Great
Britain and the United States, and culminated in an expanded five-power
globally-capable architecture for the sharing of technological capabilities
and intelligence product. After Canada was included in the 1946 BRUSA
Agreement, albeit as an affiliate of the Britain, GCHQ sought to achieve
further synergy and intelligence connectivity by mobilizing the Sigint
efforts of the self-governing Dominions (as they were then), under its own
leadership, of course. During the winter of 1946–47 the British convened a
conference of the Dominions’signals intelligence services with the aim of
creating a Commonwealth Sigint organization headed by GCHQ and having
a global interception capability. Although this objective was too ambitious
for the time, the conference did succeed in nurturing the development of
close, even intimate working relationships among the Sigint organizations
of the UK, Australia and Canada, in particular.
    This British attempt to mobilize dominion support for an ‘Old’
Commonwealth Sigint network coincided with an acute crisis in
Anglo-American intelligence cooperation, prompted by the post-war
Labour government’s controversial sale of jet engines (and, as alleged at the
time, jet aircraft) to the Soviet Union. Furious at what they saw to be a
betrayal of Western interests, the Americans reacted by placing intelligence
cooperation‘ u n d e r r e v i e w ’and stopping any further disclosures of
intelligence‘sources’,‘methods of acquisition’, and‘information pertaining
to cryptography and cryptographic devices’ –               all the essentials of
communications intelligence sharing.33 The resulting freeze no doubt
reinforced Britain’s desire to create an alternative, Dominions-based
arrangement for Sigint cooperation.
    Around the same time, in early 1948, the United States moved swiftly,
to avoid being outflanked, to negotiate separate bilateral communications
intelligence cooperation agreements with Canada and Australia. Thus
Canada found itself entangled by circumstances in competing Sigint
alliances with contending allies: the British-inspired Commonwealth Sigint
Organization (CSO) Agreement of 1947 and the Canadian-US
Communications Intelligence Agreement (CANUSA) of 1948. In any
event, faced with a deteriorating Cold War situation in Europe, the British
and Americans resolved their differences by April 1948, paving the way to
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                               109

the signing in June of the UK-USA Security Agreement (UKUSA) on
communications intelligence cooperation, the UKUSA alliance.
    Informed sources maintain that UKUSA is not a single treaty document
but rather a set of Anglo-American agreements, memoranda of
understanding and exchanges of letters which have been acceded to also by
Canada, Australia and New Zealand.34 Details of these agreements remain
highly classified. This framework agreement created a tight, resilient
collaborative arrangement between the First Party, the American NSA, and
the Second Parties, the Sigint agencies of Great Britain, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand, for cooperation in the sharing of Sigint technologies, in
targeting and operational matters, and in exchanges of foreign intelligence
collection.35
    It became an underlying principle of UKUSA that the partner countries
did not target one another or their respective nationals.36 As an expression of
the intimacy of their cooperation, CSE (and its Australian and New Zealand
counterparts) exchange liaison officers with the otherwise highly secretive
Sigint organizations of the United States (NSA) and Great Britain (GCHQ).
This pattern of liaison exemplifies the hub-and-spokes configuration of the
UKUSA relationship. Be that as it may, it is clear that most of Canada’s
foreign intelligence collection activities have taken place within the
collaborative Sigint framework of UKUSA.
    The UKUSA connection has had implications for Canada’s intelligence
role in other international security contexts. Thus, as a partner in UKUSA,
Canada was likewise involved in a so-called CANUKUS intelligence
grouping within NATO. This tripartite Canada-UK-US intelligence
grouping was said to have contributed the bulk of the input into the annual
NATO Military Committee assessments of Soviet military power.37 Other
than German intelligence, which provided particular knowledge of Eastern
Germany, CANUKAS furnished a preponderant share of NATO’s
intelligence requirements. Most of this joint intelligence input was derived
from Sigint, including CSE product.

SATELLITE C O M M U N I C A T I O N S AND ECHELON

The inauguration of the space age in communications after the 1960s was to
greatly expand global telecommunications traffic while engendering an
enhanced role for UKUSA in signals intelligence. The development of
space based technologies has served both to facilitate global
telecommunications and, conversely, to intercept these communications
from space itself and on land. Space-based Sigint satellites and their
processing facilities are exceptionally costly; the latest renditions cost to the
order of US$1 billion apiece. Since 1968 at least three classes of Sigint
110       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

satellites (‘Canyon’; ‘Rhyolite’/‘Aquacade’/‘Magnum’/’Orion’; ‘Jumpseat’
/‘Trumpet’) as well as several classes of dedicated Comint satellites
(‘Chalet/Vortex/Mercury’) have been launched by the United States, the
only country to have deployed space technologies for the interception of
communications.
    While particulars about American Sigint satellites launched after 1990
remain classified, the apparent expansion of the relevant ground centres
associated with these satellites seems to indicate that space-based collection
systems have grown in significance. Canada did not possess Sigint satellite
technologies of its own, however the UKUSA arrangement allowed CSE to
share in satellite-based Sigint collection and also to task– within certain
parameters– US satellites to respond to specific Canadian foreign
intelligence requirements.
    Ever since the 1970s a rapidly increasing share of international
telecommunications traffic has been relayed by Intelsat (International
Telecommunications Satellite Organization) satellites and other regional
communications satellites. At first just two specialized ground interception
stations, one British and the other American, were sufficient to achieve
UKUSA monitoring of all Intelsat traffic across the world. However,
subsequent refinements to Intelsat satellite design impelled the UKUSA

                                       FIGURE 4.4




Canadian satellite interception dish, Leitrim, Ontario.
                                                    Communications Security Establishment, Canada
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                              111

alliance to build a chain of six intercept stations over the years in order to
maintain global coverage, and to link these in a functional network. The
launching of Soviet and other regional communications satellites spurred
the building of other suitably-situated Sigint interception facilities to
augment this UKUSA network. One of these operated under CSE aegis at
Leitrim, Ontario, ostensibly targeted on Latin American satellite
communications.
     American Sigint satellites yielded a prodigious flow of intercepted
telecommunications traffic requiring powerful computers to process,
search, filter, and identify material of intelligence interest. CSE involvement
in the UKUSA network of ground-based installations for satellite Sigint
collection demanded a substantial upgrading of its technological base. The
first satellite interception dish was installed at Leitrim in late 1984; another
medium-size dish was erected in 1986. Staffing likewise had to be
augmented and trained to analyze and disseminate the ensuing intelligence
product.
     To deal with this surge in Sigint collection after 1984 CSE undertook a
revitalization and enlargement of its intelligence processing capacity and
cryptanalytic capabilities. Early in 1985 CSE acquired its first
supercomputer for cryptanalysis, a Cray X- MP/11. CSE staffing grew from
around 600 personnel in the late 1970s to some 720 in the mid-1980s, and
to about 900 by the end of the decade. By the late 1990s there were four
satellite dishes operating at Leitrim.
     By the 1990s, extensive refinements to UKUSA satellite interception
technologies had made possible a virtually seamless global intelligence
collection capability for the various modalities of signals intelligence
collection: local in-country, external, HF long distance and space based.
This quantum leap forward towards a convergence and meshing of Sigint
technologies reached its zenith in the tightly integrated and networked
interception and processing system known as‘Echelon’. 38 Highly secret
still,‘ E c h e l o n ’had its origins in the computerized processing and
networking technologies which evolved since the 1970s and were greatly
enhanced in the 1990s. Compared to earlier Sigint systems deployed during
the Cold War, which were designed primarily to intercept diplomatic,
espionage and military communications,‘ E c h e l o n ’had a broad banded
capacity to monitor virtually all types of electronic communications among
public and private sector organizations and individuals in almost every
country.
     The‘Echelon’system links together an array of large-scale computer
processing capabilities so as to enable the various UKUSA intercept
 stations to function as parts of an integrated, virtually seamless Sigint
network. These interception and processing technologies are able to sort
112     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

through vast flows of telecommunications traffic to identify specifically
targeted messaging. At the operational heart of this integrated
Sigint processing and networking system is the so-called ‘Echelon’
Dictionary computer. These Dictionary computers, which can store a
comprehensive database on designated targets, including names, topics of
interest, addresses, telephone numbers and other criteria for target
identification, are emplaced only in certain‘Echelon’-linked Sigint
interception facilities, though not in Canada. Given the tight networking
achieved under‘Echelon’, every participating interception facility’s
Dictionary computer contains not only its parent organization’s
designated keywords but also a list for each of the other partner Sigint
agencies.
     While CSE may not have its own‘Echelon’production capability, this
networking arrangement enables Canada to post its search lists with the
‘Echelon’ Dictionaries at other partners’ facilities. Intercepted
communications would be processed through these inter-connected
Dictionaries, with targeted intercepts being forwarded automatically to the
listing organization. The reciprocity arrangement under UKUSA gives
partner Sigint organizations virtually automatic access to Canadian
interception modalities– local in country, external, HF long distance, or
satellite downlinked– without Canada necessarily being aware of their
targets– while in return CSE gets to share and participate in the global
capabilities of the‘Echelon’system.

SIGINT T E C H N O L O G Y ACCESS AND SHARING

‘Echelon’ was designed to be a shared, collaborative Sigint collection
network. The technologies behind‘Echelon’and other high capacity Sigint
modalities were for the most part American in origin. The technologies
developed for signals intelligence purposes were so specialized and of such
advanced complexity that only experienced US defence contractors and
niche suppliers could design and manufacture this purpose-built equipment
for NSA, and then only with government technical and financial backing.39
Some of this equipment was made available to other partner Sigint
organizations. Among the American technologies reportedly procured by
CSE were Cray supercomputers,‘Echelon’systems and their miniaturized
versions (‘Oratory’) for outstations, miniaturized interception and
processing equipment for embassy-based interceptions, high-capacity/
high-speed information retrieval technologies, and high-speed traffic/topic
analysis search engines, inter alia. CSE and other Sigint partner
organizations also relied on NSA training facilities for their cryptanalytical
and other technical specialists.
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                         113

    This networking system demonstrated its robustness, and the
burden-sharing capabilities of the UKUSA arrangement, when the NSA
main computer system crashed calamitously for four days in January 2000.
What was described as a‘system overload’shut down the computers used
to process collected Sigint intelligence from 24 to 28 January, causing an
unprecedented breakdown in the processing and analysis of raw intercepts.40
Nevertheless, Sigint interceptions continued uninterrupted, and the
processing of incoming intelligence was shunted to other components of the
‘Echelon’ system for the duration of the NSA outage. CSE was likely to
have been involved, underscoring the high degree of systems integration
among UKUSA partners and the particular value of this capability to the
senior partner, the United States.
    Whereas‘ E c h e l o n ’was conceived as a shared network, there are
suggestions that its actual workings are asymmetric. According to New
Zealander Nick Hagerty’s disclosures about Government Communication
Security Board (GCSB) involvement in‘Echelon’, each participating Sigint
organization can only access that system for its own stipulated targets, and
does not necessarily share any of the intelligence generated for other
partners.41 Participating organizations may request intelligence product from
other partners’ ‘ E c h e l o n ’Dictionaries, but actual access is effectively
controlled by that country. If that is the case, Canada might not be able to
receive output of the whole‘Echelon’network even though a considerable
portion of CSE’s own intelligence collection probably goes to serve other
UKUSA partners requirements. It seems likely that only the NSA colossus,
by virtue of its size and leadership role within‘Echelon’can access the full
global potential of the system. For lesser players like CSE these controls on
‘Echelon’ access render the reciprocal sharing of signals intelligence under
UKUSA in effect asymmetrical.
    This asymmetry is also manifest in the targeting of Sigint satellites. All
the Sigint satellites available to UKUSA are proprietary US craft
embodying American technologies, though the uplinking and downlinking
networks can also involve other partners’ facilities. Under the ‘Echelon’
system these US satellites could be tasked in effect through the Dictionary
mechanism. However, notwithstanding the sharing principle underlying
UKUSA, the orbital positioning and targeting of these satellites remain
exclusively under the control of the United States. While the US has
sometimes been willing to reposition satellites so as to hover and zero in on
targets requested by UKUSA allies, such requests were not without their
difficulties and the response was entirely at American discretion.42
    It should be noted, parenthetically, that the NSA also transferred certain
of its Sigint technologies to the American private sector. Once these
technologies had become operationally obsolescent, they were spun off to
114     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

commercially successful civilian applications. However, the tables were
turning by the late 1990s, when it became apparent that private
sector-inspired developments in certain areas of information and
communications technology, like for example encryption, were beginning
to run ahead of governmental Sigint capabilities. Indeed, NSA has come
under increasingly sharp criticism from congressional intelligence
committees for not keeping pace with advances in communications
technology.43
    CSE sought to promote the local development of Sigint technologies in
niches where Canada enjoyed some particular competitive advantage and
where Canadian solutions might also possibly spin off to commercial
applications. Over the years Canada’s high-tech industry achieved
demonstrated strengths in information and communications technology.
Since an integrated market for Canadian and American defence industries
already existed, it was considered possible that a Canadian Sigint
technology could be readily marketable to NSA and other partner
organizations.
    Two particularly relevant areas of niche technology where Canada
seemed to enjoy competitive advantages were continuous speech
recognition, software that translates verbal into digital text, and
speaker/voice recognition, software than can identify individual talkers. In
 1990 CSE awarded the first of a series of contracts to the Centre de
recherche informatique de Montreal (CRIM) to design and build a
word-spotting technology for Comint applications that could function
reliably even in poor conditions.44 After encountering insurmountable
difficulties, CRIM proposed instead in 1993 to concentrate on developing a
voice/topic identification module in collaboration with some American
defence contractors. Further contracts were let, but progress towards an
operational topic spotter system was still only in the experimental phase
seven years later. Also in 1993, CSE commissioned CRIM to produce a
workable speaker identification system. There are indications that this was
achieved, and in 1995 NSA reportedly procured a Voice Activity Detector
and Analyser which may have incorporated Canadian technology.45


CANADA’S P O S T - C O L D WAR SIGINT AGENDA

These advances in Sigint technology and capabilities coincided with the
ending of the Cold War and the adoption of new, more globalized priorities
for Canada’s foreign intelligence. In 1991, for the first time, the
Government of Canada adopted an intelligence directive setting out its
priority requirements for foreign intelligence collection. These priority
requirements have updated almost annually since then. Among the current
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                           115

priorities are international terrorism, ethnic and religious conflict,
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, illegal migration,
transnational organized crime, economic (counter-)espionage, and trade
intelligence.46 These emergent objectives were given operational expression
in Sigint targeting, utilizing the enhanced technological capabilities that
were now available.
    Although CSE does not disclose its operational targets, the various
annual reports of government agencies, occasional media reportage and
other disclosures give indication of the persistent security challenges and
new priorities shaping Canada’s foreign intelligence agenda.
    While the expanded foreign intelligence requirements identified certain
new objectives, this in no way implied a relegation of traditional Canadian
security concerns. Indeed, Canadian intelligence assessments perceive an
ongoing espionage threat from Russia and other former Cold War
adversaries.47 They also assess security risks arising from newly assertive
powers like China or India with hegemonic ambitions in regions of strategic
significance to Canada; countries trying to evade internationally mandated
sanctions or Canadian embargoes; warring states attempting to interfere
with peacekeeping or preventive-diplomacy initiatives; rogue states like
Iran, Iraq or Libya seeking to exploit a presence in Canada for nefarious
purposes; or even nominally friendly countries whose perspectives on
certain key issues relating to national security may conflict with those of
Canada. Thus, clandestine French activities in support of Quebec
separatism were closely monitored and countered by Canadian intelligence
services.48
    The security concerns of Canadian intelligence extended as well to the
inappropriate activities of foreign governments trying to exercise improper
influence on Canadian decision-making or public opinion, as when China
attempted surreptitiously to buy control of local Chinese-language print and
broadcast media outlets in order to manipulate sentiment in the aftermath of
the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.49
    CSE plays a part in helping to defend Canadian sovereignty and strategic
interests by collecting operational intelligence on international security
threats for Canadian government departments; providing counter-
intelligence support by monitoring clandestine activities; and protecting
Canada’s communications systems against foreign intrusion.

International terrorism figures prominently among the security concerns for
Canadian foreign and security intelligence.50 Many of the world’s terrorist
groups have established a presence in Canada, virtually all of them relating
to ethnic, religious or nationalist conflicts elsewhere in the world.51 Among
the international terrorist organizations or fronts active in Canada are
116     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Hizballah and other Shiite Islamic terrorist organizations from the Middle
East, the Palestinian Hamas, the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA),
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam from Sri Lanka, the Kurdistan
Workers Party (PKK) from Turkey, and every significant Sikh terrorist
group from India. These organizations established Canadian sanctuaries in
order to raise and transfer funds, procure weaponry and material, set up
operational bases, and to cover infiltration across the border to the United
States or overseas.
    Operational responsibility for security intelligence against terrorist
threats to public safety or national security is vested mainly in the Canadian
Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), working together with other
government departments (e.g. Citizenship and Immigration, Department of
Justice), Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and local police
services. It may be presumed that CSE monitors the international
communications of suspected terrorist elements based in Canada as well as
the activities of complicit foreign groups trying to operate through Canada
to attack friendly countries. In a recent instance, Sigint interceptions helped
foil an alleged conspiracy by a Montreal-based cell of the Algerian‘Armed
Islamic Group’(GIA) to commit a terrorist bombing attack in the US during
the New Year’s 2000 celebrations.52

Transnational crime was recognized by the Group of 7 (G-7) Summit in
Halifax in 1995 as a national security threat to many facets of public order
– political, economic, social and environmental.53 Since then international
criminality has emerged as a priority concern for foreign and security
intelligence in Canada and other UKUSA countries.54 Organized criminal
enterprises originating in Eastern Europe, Asia, North and South America,
and Africa span the world, moving money, people and goods across borders,
including Canada’s.
    Even more threatening than the traditional transnational crimes like
trafficking in drugs and arms, money-laundering, and tax evasion, are the
larger-scale, potentially more devastating instances of major international
fraud, corruption and the manipulation of political and financial systems,
which can destabilize democratic governments, subvert legitimate
institutions, undermine social order, and distort economic activities.
    UKUSA operations against international crime extended to the creation
of a dialogue forum involving the five partners with other European
countries, the International Law Enforcement Telecommunications
Seminar (ILETS), which aimed to coordinate design standards for tele-
communications equipment and software so that they remain accessible to
legal surveillance. This of course implied that global telecommunications
would remain vulnerable to covert interception, which some in the
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                          117

European Union have come to regard as a significant threat to their
commercial interests and privacy rights.55
    Canada has not been immune to these types of transnational criminality.
In 1995 CSIS indicated that Canada’s intelligence community would take
on a role in combating transnational crime, primarily through the provision
of international criminal intelligence and strategic analyses to law
enforcement agencies.56 As part of this combined effort it may be expected
that CSE would target the international communications of criminal
personalities or organizations.
    International commercial crime is especially vulnerable to Sigint
interceptions, given its inescapable dependence on electronic means of
voice and data communications. Sigint interceptions could offer a unique
aperture into illicit transactions and criminal activities that threaten the
integrity of Canadian financial and commercial institutions. As well, Sigint
could contribute timely information on the bona fides of certain large
commercial entities operating out of turbulent regions of the world and
seeking to do business in Canada.57 The intelligence collected can serve to
aid law enforcement and the effectiveness of financial and commercial
regulatory agencies. Furthermore, it could help inform Canadian foreign
policy decision-making regarding the countries concerned.
    Canadian foreign and security intelligence concerns are also directed at
the connection between transnational criminality, on the one hand, and
terrorist racketeering and criminal collaboration with insurgency
movements elsewhere, on the other. In one of the more notorious instances,
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam established an underground network
among Tamil sympathizers across Canada and also became extensively
involved in racketeering to generate financing for their insurgency war in
Sri Lanka.58 Their criminal activities are alleged to have included drug
trafficking partnerships with Pakistani heroin producers, immigrant
smuggling, commercial fraud, and extortion from Tamils residing in this
country and elsewhere. Sigint operations can provide law enforcement
agencies and foreign policy-makers with timely intelligence about attempts
by transnational criminal elements to undermine the integrity of other
countries and influence our own in ways detrimental to the laws and
interests of Canada.
    Canada participates in virtually the entire array of global and regional
initiatives to counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. Canadian nuclear capabilities are devoted
exclusively to peaceful purposes. Its non-proliferation foreign policy is
aimed at ensuring that Canada’s nuclear exports are utilized solely for
intended, non-military purposes, and to promote the evolution of a
comprehensive and effective non-proliferation regime. By way of
118      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

supporting this non-proliferation policy, CSE operations aim at identifying
attempts by countries of proliferation concern to acquire Canadian
weapons-related technology and expertise. Intelligence produced by Sigint
helps keep the Government of Canada and its allies alert to proliferation
threats.59

THE E C O N O M I C I N T E L L I G E N C E C O N U N D R U M

Many countries, from major powers to other smaller trade-dependent
nations, have made the collection of economic intelligence an increasingly
significant function of their respective foreign intelligence services.
Economic intelligence is expected to identify opportunities and warn of
threats to national economic and commercial interests. As early as 1970 the
former Executive Director of the US Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
assigned economic intelligence a priority equivalent to diplomatic, military,
technological intelligence.60 Canada’s post-Cold War intelligence directives
identified economic espionage and competitiveness among its priorities for
targeting.61
    The implications of economic intelligence collection inject a
competitive impulse, not to say conflicts of interest, into the otherwise
cooperative ethos of UKUSA. To deal with this, a consensus seems to have
emerged among the UKUSA partner organizations to the effect that
commercial firms are not allowed to actually task Sigint operations for their
own commercial purposes. Doing so could have posed operational risks,
and is in fact unnecessary. Rather, the practice seems to have been for each
UKUSA country to mandate its own national intelligence assessment
organization and relevant government departments to task and receive
economic intelligence from Sigint sources. Decisions on whether to
disseminate this economic intelligence to the private companies were
typically taken by these other governmental instrumentalities and not by the
Sigint organizations themselves. Thus, for example, it is reported that
Australia’s Defence Signals Directorate regularly remitted commercially
relevant Sigint to the Office of National Assessments, which in turn
disseminated pertinent information to interested government departments
and also private firms.62
    Until recently Canadian efforts in economic intelligence seem to have
been primarily defensive in orientation. According to intelligence sources,
Canada’s chief concern in this domain has been to counter economic
espionage, defined as‘clandestine, deceptive, coercive or illegal activity
carried out or facilitated by a foreign government aimed at obtaining access
to Canadian proprietary information and/or technology for reasons of
economic advantage’.63 CSIS carried the main responsibility for countering
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                          119

economic espionage in the context of its security intelligence mandate,
however Sigint doubtless made a contribution. One indication of growing
CSE involvement in this domain was its 1995 effort to recruit additional
staff with qualifications in economics, commerce and international
business, in order to build up its own analytical capacity in economic
intelligence.64
    CSE operations in economic intelligence have gone rather beyond the
strictly defensive to also help promote Canadian economic competitiveness
and commercial objectives in world markets. Accounts published by
reliable journalists claim that CSE provided Canadian policy-makers and
negotiators with economic intelligence pertaining to international trade
negotiations, including the plurilateral negotiations with Mexico on the
North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) of 1994; the 1995
multilateral (‘Uruguay Round’) trade negotiations; the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial and Leaders’meetings in
Vancouver in 1997; and bilateral negotiations with South Korea on their
procurement of Candu nuclear reactors and with China on wheat sales.65 The
targeting of international economic and business affairs remains, of course,
a highly delicate matter, all the more so in view of Canada’s overwhelming
trade dependence on the United States.
    CSE efforts in economic intelligence do not appear to have provided
Canadian commercial firms with access to Sigint products, at least not
directly. The Canadian government has no identifiably dedicated unit either
in the Privy Council Office, which coordinates Canada’s intelligence effort,
or in the intelligence agencies, or in the Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade or Industry Canada, which could handle the interface
between commercially-relevant intelligence and the private sector. Indeed,
the peculiar structure of Canadian industry would greatly complicate any
provision of government-sourced commercial intelligence to the private
sector. Much of Canada’s large-scale industry consists of subsidiaries of
foreign firms which would make the dissemination of commercial
intelligence highly problematic. To be sure, there are important Canadian
industrial enterprises in the telecommunications, aircraft, power generation
and civil engineering sectors, industries that are generally dependent on
politically determined markets, but there is no evidence that the Canadian
government supplies these firms with commercial intelligence in support of
their marketing ventures.
    Of course, government officials may sometimes provide advice and
counsel by way of helping to promote Canadian trade, without necessarily
revealing their sources in economic intelligence. Canada’s crown
corporations present a somewhat different challenge for economic
intelligence: these enterprises, established by the federal and provincial
120     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

governments, control important sectors of the export economy, including
grain exports, energy exports, and export insurance and finance, where
commercial intelligence can yield competitive advantages in
government-to- government negotiations. However, it is questionable
whether any intelligence so garnered was actually shared with crown
corporations like the Canadian Wheat Board or Atomic Energy Canada
Limited, or whether government negotiators themselves used this
information to shape their bargaining positions on such public sector
transactions as wheat sales to China or Candu sales to South Korea.
    CSE is also responsible for Canadian information technology security
(ITS). Canada has state-of-the-art industrial capabilities in various
sectors of information technology, and Canadian companies have been
targeted by foreign governments for economic or industrial espionage.66
Some of the foreign governments engaging in technological espionage
are recent adversaries while others are erstwhile friends and allies.
Moreover, certain of these information technologies can have dual use, and
may be vulnerable to redeployment by weapons proliferators or even
terrorists. As the lead federal agency for ITS, CSE provided technical
information, tools and expert services to government departments and
private industry in areas of Network Security, Internet Security,
Cryptography and Public Key Infrastructure. The aim of CSE industrial
programmes is to collaborate with Canadian industry to develop advanced
ITS products and services.67
    It is inherently difficult to assess the operational performance of
intelligence agencies. According to the 1996 Auditor-General’s report,
CSE has made a significant effort to cost its operations and products and
identify gaps in its collection of signals intelligence in relation to national
priorities and the specific requirements of client departments.68 The
government’s own assessment of the performance and value of Sigint is
indicated in its resource commitments to CSE, both funding and staffing.
In the early post-Cold War period, government budgetary appropriations
for CSE were estimated at C$113 million for fiscal year 1995–96, a
reduction of about 10 per cent in real terms from 1990–91 (i.e. Cold War)
levels. This compared favourably with the sharp cutbacks that took place
in federal spending generally, including (indeed especially) national
defence. While a declining trend continued for virtually all government
departments and agencies, the nominal CSE budget for 1999/2000 of
C$109 million suggests that Sigint continued to fare better than most other
government services.69
    Staffing has remained stable at approximately 900 (exclusive of
Canadian Forces Information Operations Group personnel), with the
proportion of analysts probably expanding. DND defence planning
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                            121

guidelines project a 6 per cent increase in CSE’s budget over the next five
years.

FUTURE CHALLENGES

Signals intelligence collection provides Canada’s policy-makers and
security establishment with a capacity to cope with risk and threats to
Canadian interests in an otherwise uncertain and volatile global security
environment. Canada has a comparatively small population, yet it is a
member of the G-7 and is extensively engaged in international relations in
security, trade and finance, social affairs, environment, development,
peacekeeping, and global governance. These international involvements
entail a requirement for foreign intelligence in support of policy-making
and the conduct of bilateral and multilateral relations. CSE has been able to
provide this intelligence in part by dint of its own Sigint capabilities, but
more significantly through the extended capabilities available to Canada
under the UKUSA arrangement.
    Current trends in Sigint imply two major challenges for CSE’s future
capability to perform its signals intelligence collection and processing
functions.
    The first of these challenges stems from ongoing trends in
communications technology which tend to favour communications security
over penetration and protection over interception.
    A second set of challenges arises from prospective changes in the
dynamics of UKUSA once competition outstrips cooperation in the
emergent globalized agenda for intelligence collection, and in particular
economic intelligence. It is ironic that these challenges derive from existing
arrangements that have served CSE well, but are now developing in
directions that can jeopardize the future capacity of CSE to respond to
Canada’s foreign intelligence requirements.
    The technological lead in computers and information technology once
enjoyed by Sigint organizations has now been very largely dissipated.70
Widely available technologies today offer others, including potential
adversaries, the same technical advantages to protect their communications
as Sigint hitherto had to monitor this traffic. As a result, access to global
communications networks is likely to become increasingly problematic for
signals intelligence. This will become even more challenging as
international telecommunications shifts over to high capacity optical fibre
networks which reportedly cannot be intercepted by current Sigint
technologies.71 Intrusive access would be necessary for interceptions.
Clandestine operations of this type would be risky, and could become
politically unacceptable.72
122     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Sigint advantages in cryptanalysis are likewise dissipating in face of
rapid advances in civil and commercial cryptography along with the
development of more effective cryptographic security systems.73 Indeed
encryption is becoming widespread very rapidly as electronic commerce
expands, an increasingly problematic trend for communications intelligence
collection, in particular. It is clear that CSE and its Sigint partner
organizations were unsuccessful in their bid to constrain private sector
cryptography by arguing for‘public key escrow’and similar systems
ostensibly to support law enforcement (as distinct from signals intelligence)
requirements. Innovative and costlier technologies will have to be deployed
in future in order to stretch cryptanalytical capabilities sufficiently to extract
the intelligence required.
    The transition from the Cold War to a new, more globalized Sigint
agenda poses certain other challenges for the future of UKUSA operational
solidarity and intelligence sharing. It has been a principle of UKUSA
cooperation that its Sigint activities do not target one another or their
respective nationals (including corporations). Whenever Sigint intercepts
incidentally implicate nationals of the partner countries, steps are taken to
protect the anonymity of the individual(s), or enterprise(s) in the handling
and sharing of the intelligence. This principled understanding was
necessary in order to ensure compliance with national law and self-interest
in the partner countries while facilitating inter-group collaboration and
 sharing of signals intelligence collection; it also served to mitigate
conflicts of interest.
     Once the Cold War was over, however, the adoption of a more broadly
 globalized agenda for foreign intelligence collection by each of the
UKUSA partner countries, including Canada, had far reaching implications
 for the shared Sigint enterprise. Unlike the focused Sigint effort of the
recent past, the more broadly targeted post-Cold War intelligence
 directives adopted by the UKUSA governments were not entirely
congruent one with the other. Differences and asymmetries in priorities
created a potential for conflicts of interest over Sigint targeting and
intelligence collection. Although UKUSA partners remain committed to
the principle of refraining from targeting each other or their respective
nationals, nevertheless a former US National Security Council official
Howard Teicher made a point of commenting:
      I would never say never in this business because, at the end of the day,
      national interests are national interests ... sometimes our interests
      diverge. So never say never– especially in this business.74
Arguably, the risks of conflicts of interest within UKUSA are greatest in
the increasingly important Sigint domain of economic intelligence. It is
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                            123

 here that the UKUSA ethos of cooperation may be most vulnerable to
 protectionist impulses and dysfunctional competition. In as much as
 UKUSA countries are major trading partners between and among
 themselves, they are often engaged in trade negotiations or dispute
 settlement procedures at the bilateral, regional (e.g. APEC, NAFTA) and
 multilateral (e.g. World Trade Organization) levels. Since these economies
 are also competitors in many world markets, they are frequently keen
 commercial rivals. In the circumstances, Sigint economic intelligence
 operations that never targeted other partners’commercial interests or
 negotiating stances would probably be deemed irrelevant by domestic
 policy-makers, and yet any effort to systematically target allies’proprietary
 commercial, technological or policy secrets would compromise UKUSA
 collaboration and render the‘ E c h e l o n ’alliance highly problematic.
 Nonetheless, press accounts describe the activities of friendly and even
 allied countries i n ’eavesdropping on one another in order to gain
 negotiating advantages at bilateral and multilateral meetings on
 international trade.75
     Hence the paradox of cooperation/competition that confronts Sigint in
 the domain of economic intelligence. Economic intelligence collection
 which is timely and informative for competitive advantage can be
 inherently undermining and destructive of operational cooperation and
 technology sharing. Yet any turn of events that would tend to constrain
 collaboration in UKUSA would substantially weaken CSE’s capacity to
 achieve near global access to Sigint facilities to meet Canada’s foreign
intelligence requirements. Foreign intelligence is an essentially competitive
enterprise in which countries seek their own advantage, and in which all
gains are differential, asymmetric gains.
     Another area of potential conflict of interest among UKUSA partners
concerns the use of Sigint interceptions for law enforcement purposes.76 In
targeting transnational crime, Sigint operations must take account of the
mandatory legal and technical prerequisites governing interceptions for law
enforcement purposes, as distinct from interceptions of communications
intelligence. Not only must this distinction be recognized and observed, it
must be observed operationally and reciprocally across the multiple legal
jurisdictions of UKUSA so as not to compromise the bona fides of law
enforcement. Any blurring of this distinction would risk dangerous
illegalities and human rights transgressions and the gathering of
inadmissible evidence. It is pertinent to acknowledge in this regard that
Canadian jurisprudence is more protective of privacy rights than many other
legal systems, including that of the United States.77
     It is questionable whether Canadian law or Charter of Rights and
Freedoms can be applicable to Sigint operations that task CSE facilities to
124      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

target alleged transnational criminality at the behest of UKUSA partners.
The legal issues implicit in Sigint-derived evidence have never been tested
before Canada’s courts. Whenever questions have been raised, mere
reference to Canada’s‘international’obligations has sufficed to defer
detailed inquiries. Up until now Canadians have been generally (albeit
tacitly) willing to countenance Sigint interceptions for‘security’purposes,
however broadly defined. Were there to be perceived violations of law and
human rights, however, these are unlikely to be politically acceptable to
government and public. Yet for Canada (or another partner country) to
impose national legal or human rights standards unilaterally onto Sigint
interceptions might well jeopardize future UKUSA collaboration against
transnational crime and other sensitive targets.
    The more Canada’s foreign intelligence requirements become globalized
in future, the greater will be CSE’s reliance on UKUSA sharing
arrangements and the more its operational activities will become exposed to
the underlying risks. The prospect of any lessening of these cooperative
Sigint capabilities, whether due to technological trends, differential interests
of partners, or legal dilemmas, could severely circumscribe Canada’s
capacity for foreign intelligence collection. Canada depends on CSE to
manage its own resources and international linkages in a way that
safeguards its future capacity to respond to Canadian foreign intelligence
requirements in an increasingly predatory international environment.


                                         NOTES

 1. Federal government expenditure on signals intelligence and information technology security
    involves the combined budgets of CSE itself and the Canadian Forces Information
    Operations Group, which provides operational personnel for its interception facilities, and
    which together exceed spending on the domestic security intelligence organization, the
    Canadian Security Intelligence Service.
 2. CSE (like its predecessor, the Communications Branch of the National Research Council)
    was established by Order-in-Council, that is by cabinet decree, rather than on the basis of
    formal enabling legislation. There is very little information in the public domain regarding
    CSE. Some carefully crafted official information is available in the Report of the Auditor
    General of Canada, 1996, The Canadian Intelligence Community– Control and
    Accountability (Ottawa: Nov. 1996) Chapter 27; in annual reports of the Office of CSE
    Commissioner; in infrequent officials’testimony before Parliamentary committees; and in
    snippets of other periodic reports (e.g. DND budgetary documents, The Privacy
    Commissioner’s 1995–96 Annual Report). The CSE’s own website (URL:
    www.cse.dnd.gc.ca) concentrates on its public information technology security mission.
    There have been occasional newspaper articles on CSE activities and references to it in
    studies of other Canadian intelligence organizations or allied Sigint organizations. An
    unofficial website prepared by Bill Robinson on The Communications Security
    Establishment: An Unofficial Look Inside Canada’s Signals Intelligence Agency is accessible
    at the URL: http://watservl.uwaterloo.ca/~brobinso/cse.html.
 3. For a synopsis of the structure of government control and accountability over the Canadian
    intelligence community, see the Report of the Auditor General of Canada, 1996, Chapter 27:
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                                             125
    The Canadian Intelligence Community. Control and Assessment, paras. 27.66-27-94 (URL:
    www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/domino/reports.nfs/html9627ce.html).
 4. Peter Hum, ‘I Spy’, Ottawa Citizen, 10 May 1997.
 5. Auditor-General, The Canadian Intelligence Community (note 2) para. 27.30
 6. Ibid. para. 27.82.
 7. On the wartime history of Canadian signals intelligence see John Bryden, Best-Kept Secret:
    Canadian Secret Intelligence in the Second World War (Toronto: Lester 1993); Wesley Wark,
    ‘Cryptographic Innocence: The Origins of Signals Intelligence in Canada in the Second
    World War’, Journal of Contemporary History 22 (1987) pp.639–65.
 8. Kevin O Neill, History of CBNRC (1987)[Classified]. Parts of this internal history have been
    released in abridged form under the Access to Information Act.
 9. Vladislav Zubok and Constantine Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin’s Cold War. From Stalin to
    Khrushchev (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP 1996) p.146.
10. For an article placing Gouzenko’s defection into the larger foreign policy context relating to
    Canadian involvement in the Cold War, see Robert Bothwell,‘The Cold War and the Curate’s
    Egg: When did Canada’s Cold War Really Begin?’, International Journal 53/3 (Summer
    1998).
11. Nigel West, Venona: The Greatest Secret of the Cold War (Toronto: HarperCollins 1999).
12. While most CBNRC personnel were Canadian, for several years senior staff came from
    Britain’s GCHQ, giving indication of the early and close working relationship established
    between the British Sigint organization and its emergent Canadian counterpart.
13. Bryden, Best Kept Secret (note 7) pp.280–1; Christopher Andrew,‘ T h e Making of the
    Anglo-American Sigint Alliance’, in Hayden Peake and Samuel Halperin (eds.) In the Name
    of Intelligence: Essays in Honor of Walter Pforzheimer (Washington DC: NIBC Press 1994)
    p.105.
14. Stephen Dorril, M16. Inside the Covert World of Her Majesty’s Secret Intelligence Service
    (NY: Free Press 2000) pp.54–5. Australia likewise consented to being represented in the
    alliance by Great Britain.
15. Bryden, Best Kept Secret (note 7) pp.291–2; Wark,‘CryptologicInnocence’(note 7) p.659.
    I am indebted to Matthew Aid for making available his impressive historical records on
    Canadian Sigint.
16. Robinson, The Communications Security Establishment (note 2) Sigint sites; O’Neill,
    History of CBNRC (note 8) Chap.2; Matthew Aid, communication to author.
17. Bryden, Best Kept Secret (note 7) p.296; Memo, Agee to Coordinator of Joint Operations,
    Proposed US-Canadian Agreement, 7 June 1948, RG-341, cited in communication from
    Matthew Aid.
18. Bryden, Best-Kept Secret (note 7) p.326. For a summary of Canadian cryptanalysis in the
    service of signals intelligence, see Bill Robinson,‘The Fall and Rise of Cryptanalysis in
    Canada’, Cryptologia (Jan. 1992) and‘Cryptanalysis at CSE’, The Communications Security
    Establishment (note 2).
19. Mark Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (London: Faber 1996) p.6.
20. Robinson,‘Cryptanalysis at CSE’and‘The Fall and Rise of Cryptanalysis in Canada’(note
    18).
21. Richard Cleroux, Official Secrets (Toronto: McLelland & Stewart 1991) p.266.
22. N.C. Gerson,‘Collaboration in Sigint: Canada-US’, NCVA Cryptolog (Spring 1999);
    Matthew Aid personal communication.
23. Peter Wright, Spycatcher (New York: Viking 1987).
24. Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin, The Mitrokhin Archive. The KGB in Europe and
    the West (London: Allen Lane, The Penguin Press 1999) pp.451, 448, 850, footnote 63.
25. Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (note 19) p.6.
26. Eldon Black, Direct Intervention. Canada-France Relations 1967–1974 (Ottawa: Carleton
    UP 1996) refers to Canadian‘security authorities’providing intelligence on French
    communications with‘dubious contacts in Quebec’(pp.50–1). For reports on CSE
    monitoring Quebec separatist communications with France, see Doug Gilmour,‘ W C C
    Members Likely Targets for Defence Monitors– Ex-Spy’, Edmonton Journal, 15 Oct. 1982;
126       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     Peter Moon,‘Canadian Agency Safeguards its Role in World Spy Game’, Globe and Mail,
     30 March 1987; Gerry Arnold,‘Officials Deny Report of Canada-France Spy Feud’, Ottawa
     Citizen, 22 May 1992; Mike Frost and Michel Gratton, Spyworld: Inside the Canadian and
    American Intelligence Establishments (Toronto: Doubleday 1994); cited in Robinson,
    ‘Eavesdropping on the Quebec separatist movement’, The Communications Security
    Establishment (note 2).
27. Andrew and Mitrokhin, The Mitrokhin Archive (note 24) p.453.
28. On one occasion, at least, an external interception operation was reportedly mounted in an
     allied country at the invitation of that government. Thus, on the eve of the British general
    election of 1983, GCHQ was alleged to have conveyed a personal request from Prime
    Minister Margaret Thatcher for Canadian Sigint assistance in monitoring communications of
    two of her cabinet ministers ostensibly‘to find out not what they were saying, but what they
    were thinking’. CSE involvement was sought due to the extraordinary political sensitivity of
    the operation, which made it inappropriate for GCHQ itself to undertake. An interception
    facility was set up at the Canadian High Commission in London and the‘take’was delivered
    to GCHQ. This alleged episode was revealed by former CSE employee, Mike Frost, in a CBS
    ‘60 Minutes’ program and reported in ‘Spy Agencies List in on Diana’, Sunday Times (27
    Feb. 2000).
29. Frost and Gratton, Spyworld (note 26) pp.19, 72, 76; Bruce Livesey,‘Trolling for Secrets:
    Economic Espionage is the New Niche for Government Spies’, Financial Post, 28 Feb.
     1998.
30. Frost and Gratton, Spyworld (note 26) pp.183, 191
31. Canadians reportedly underbid the United States on this wheat deal after having intercepted
    a car phone conversation between the US Ambassador and Ottawa Embassy discussing the
    American negotiating position. Cf.‘ T h e Murky Side of Trade’, Livesey,‘Trolling for
    Secrets’.
32. Jeffrey Richelson and Desmond Ball, The Ties that Bind: Intelligence Cooperation Between
    the UKUSA Countries (London: Allen & Unwin 1985) p.144. All the outlying receiver
    stations are now remote controlled from Leitrim.
33. Cited in Dorril, M16 (note 14) p.56.
34. On the unusual character of the UKUSA arrangement see Jeffrey Richelson, The US
    Intelligence Community (NY: Ballinger 1989) esp. Chap. 12; Robinson,‘ T h e UKUSA
    Community’, in The Communications Security Establishment (note 2); Richelson and Ball,
    The Ties that Bind (note 32) pp.142–3 et passim; on the origins of UKUSA see Andrew,‘The
    Making of the Anglo-American Sigint Alliance’(note 13).
35. One of the rare explicit official references to the UKUSA agreements was made by the
    Deputy Clerk, Security and Intelligence, Privy Council Office, in testimony before the House
    of Commons Standing Committee on National Defence and Veterans Affairs, 2 May 1995.
36. Margaret Bloodworm, Deputy Clerk, Security and Intelligence, Privy Council Office,
    evidence presented to the House of Commons Committee on National Defence, 2 May 1995.
37. Urban, UK Eyes Alpha (note 19) pp.32–3.
38. Very little has been revealed officially about‘Echelon’by any of the UKUSA governments.
    Among the seemingly better informed sources are Interception Capabilities 2000, the Report
    to the Director-General for Research of the European Parliament prepared by Duncan
    Campbell (1999); and the disclosures about New Zealand involvement in Nick Hager, Secret
    Power. New Zealand’s Role in the International Spy Network (Nelson, NZ: Craig Potton
     1996), esp. Chap. 2 and‘Exposing the Global Surveillance System’, Covert Action Quarterly
    (Winter 1997).
39. One of the rare descriptions of contemporary Sigint equipment is provided in the Technical
    Annexe to– Interception Technologies 2000 (note 38).
40. ‘NSA System Inoperative for Four Days’, Washington Post, 30 Jan. 2000.
41. Hager,‘Exposing the Global Surveillance System’(note 38).
42. For an account of the British experience in persuading the US to reposition its Sigint satellite
    to provide intelligence coverage at the time of the Falklands War (1982) see Urban, UK Eyes
    Alpha (note 19) p.57.
CANADA’S COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY ESTABLISHMENT                                               127
43. ‘NSA System Inoperative for Four Days’.
44. Interception Technologies 2000 (note 38) Technical Annexe, paras. 33–6.
45. Ibid. para. 36.
46. Auditor-General, The Canadian Intelligence Community (note 3) para. 27.31.
47. Canadian Security Intelligence Service, 7997 Public Report, Parts 1, 3 URL: www.csis-
     scrs. gc .ca/eng/publicrp/pub 1997e .html.
48. Cf. Black, Direct Intervention (note 26) pp.50–1.
49. According to the media disclosure, telephone intercepts were part of this counterintelligence
     operation:‘CSIS warned Ottawa of Beijing Media Plot’, Globe and Mail, 9 Feb. 2000.
50. CSIS 1997 Public Report, Part 2.
51. CSIS, Trends in Terrorism, Perspectives, Report 2000/01, 18 Dec. 1999.
52. Newspaper accounts describe the role of Sigint interceptions in unravelling what appears to
     have been a complex Islamic terrorist conspiracy:‘US Probe Ties Bomb Plot to Bin Laden
     Group’, Washington Post, 20 Feb. 2000; see also‘Calls Said to Link Woman to Man with
     Explosives’, New York Times, 13 Jan. 2000,‘Canada Adds Details on Algerians’Suspected
     Bomb Plot’, New York Times, 21 Jan. 2000,‘Algerian Charged in Bombing Plot Aids FBI
     Probe’, Washington Post, 21 Jan. 2000.
53. Samuel Porteous,‘The Threat from Transnational Crime: An Intelligence Perspective’, CSIS
     Commentary #70 (Ottawa: CSIS, Winter 1996).
54. CSIS 1997 Public Report, Part 3;‘Whose (sic) Being Spied On?’BBC, 13 Sept. 1999.
55. ‘Comment les Etats-Unis espionnent l’Europe’, Le Monde, 23 Feb. 2000.
56. CSIS 7995 Public Report and Outlook (Ottawa: Canadian Security Intelligence Service
      1995). The RCMP Economic Crimes Directorate is responsible for investigating commercial
     crime in Canada. Parliament is currently considering a bill to set up a dedicated Financial
     Transactions and Reporting Analysis Centre to monitor international money movements.
57. Porteous, The Threat from Transnational Crime (note 53).
58. Ibid.
59. CSIS 7997 Public Report, Part 3.
60. Interception Technologies 2000, para. 97; Samuel Porteus,‘Economic/Commercial Interests
     and Intelligence Services’, CSIS Commentary #59 (Ottawa: CSIS, July 1995).
61. See Auditor-General, The Canadian Intelligence Community, para. 27.27.31; CSIS, 1997
     Public Report, Part 3.
62. Interception Technologies 2000 (note 38) para. 100.
63. CSIS, 1997 Public Report, Part 3.
64. Porteus,‘Economic/Commercial Interests and Intelligence Services’(note 60).
 65. Livesey,‘Trolling for Secrets’(note 29).
 66. CSIS 1997 Public Report, Part 3.
 67. On the Canadian Information Technology Security program operated by CSE see the CSE
      website at URL: www.cse.dnd.gc.ca.
 68. Auditor-General, The Canadian Intelligence Community (note 3) Chap. 27: The Canadian
      Intelligence Community. Control and Assessment, paras. 107–9.
 69. Robinson, The Communications Security Establishment (note 2).
 70. According to Lt. Gen. Michael V. Hayden, Director of NSA, the Sigint agency is already
      lagging behind private sector technological developments in telecommunications (Address
      to Kennedy Political Union of American University, 17 Feb. 2000). See also Interception
      Capabilities 2000 (note 38) paras. 106–8.
 71. The possible existence of a new, top secret American technology to intercept fibre optic
      traffic is mentioned in Le Nouvel Observateur [Paris], (10–16 Dec. 1998) pp.10–22.
 72. NSA has sought to overcome this growing cryptanalytical constraint by collaborating with
      CIA in a joint initiative, the Special Collection Service, which undertakes clandestine
      intrusive operations to intercept traffic from otherwise secure targeted systems:‘Une alliance
      secrète entre la NSA et la CIA’, Le Monde, 22 Feb. 2000.
 73. Simon Singh, The Code Book (London: Fourth Estate 1999) examines the evolution of codes
      up to current experimentation with quantum cryptography, which is said to be absolutely
      unbreakable; see also Interception Capabilities 2000 (note 38) paras. 109–10.
128      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

74. Cited in Interception Capabilities 2000 (note 38) para. 105.
75. Cf.‘The Murky Side of Trade Meetings’; Duncan Campbell and Paul Lasmar,‘The New
    Cold War: How America Spies on Us for its Oldest Friend– The Dollar’, The Independent,
    2 July 2000.
76. Cf. Interception Capabilities 2000,‘Policy Issues for the European Parliament’(note 38)
    para. 4.
77. Cf. Paul Palango, The Last Guardians (Toronto: McLelland & Stewart 1998) pp.165–7.
                                     5
            The Bundesnachrichtendienst,
          the Bundeswehr and Sigint in the
                Cold War and After

                ERICH SCHMIDT-EENBOOM
                     (Translated by William Fairbanks)



Thanks to the films coming out of Hollywood and articles appearing in the
mass media, the world’s second oldest profession owes much of its aura to
the misleading impression that most of its operational accomplishments
have come from the activities of daredevil secret agents, who while
operating deep behind the enemy’s lines ransacked the safes of foreign
powers, thereby gaining access to the most carefully guarded secrets of the
enemy. But in fact, the everyday activities of these intelligence agencies
have about as much in common with what is portrayed in spy movies as
sports by amateurs have anything to do with attempts to break athletic world
records.
    The truth is that the clandestine spying activities of the world’s
intelligence agencies account for a very small percentage of the intelligence
being collected. According to publicly available materials, modern
intelligence services obtain about 75 per cent of their information from open
sources, with only 25 per cent coming from secret intelligence. Of these
secret intelligence reports, three-quarters come from Signals Intelligence
(Sigint), which in German is known as Fernmelde-und Elektronische
Aufklärung (Telecommunications and Electronic Reconnaissance, FmElo).
And most of the information being collected is of little use to intelligence
analysts. Of the about 100,000 intelligence reports that landed in 1989 on
the desks of the analysts of the West Germany federal intelligence service,
the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND), only about 450 of these reports were
considered to contain useful information.1
    Not only the amount and diversity of the telecommunications
transmission media increased enormously during the 1990s, but alongside
them also the greed of the intelligence services to suck information from
them by using increasingly more ingenious methods. Yet, the ether was not
always the most worthwhile medium for intelligence hunting expeditions.
130     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

THE EARLY YEARS

Shortly before the end of World War II, on 10 April 1945, Hitler relieved
Major General Reinhard Gehlen from his post as head of the
Wehrmachtsabteilung Fremde Heere Ost (Foreign Armies East, FHO) of the
General Staff. With 50 steel suitcases loaded with microfilms he took refuge
in the‘Alpenfestung’and surrendered himself on 20 May 1945 in the
vicinity of Miesbach to the American CIC (Counterintelligence Corps). The
CIC however sent the former Nazi general to a special prison in Oberursel.
Here in July 1945, Gehlen drew the attention of Brigadier General Edwin L.
Sibert, head of the secret service in the US occupation zone. Because of the
fact that the East–West conflict was already looming over the horizon and
the US intelligence services hardly had any knowledge about the Soviet
armed forces, Sibert sent Gehlen to Washington in August, where he stayed
until 7 July 1946.
    In the United States, in June 1946 the future chief of the German secret
service successfully negotiated an agreement allowing him to resume his
intelligence work mainly aimed at collecting military information from the
Soviet Union and her satellite states. Gehlen could start with 50 personnel
of the Organisation Gehlen (OG), which was financed by the United States,
On 6 December 1947 the OG deployed to Pullach in the southern part of
Munich. On 1 April 1956 the organization was taken over by the Federal
Republic as the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND) and placed under the
supervision of the Bundeskanzler.2
    When the OG began in 1946 under the patronage of the OSS/CIA to
primarily spy on the Soviet military, Human Intelligence (Humint) was the
principal method by the Germans to collect intelligence behind the Iron
Curtain. Two examples of OG Humint operations will suffice. During
Operation‘Hermes’, tens of thousands of German prisoners returning from
Soviet POW camps were interrogated by Gehlen operatives for information
about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain. And during Operation
‘Fahrrad’, the trash of Soviet military garrisons in occupied Austria was
scoured by OG agents looking for useful intelligence information which the
Russians had thrown away.3
    Conceptual thinking about an independent West German Sigint service
started late through the former Wehrmacht lieutenant general, Adolf
Heusinger,4 the General Staff chief of operations till he was arrested after
the plot on 20 July 1944 and working for OG from March 1948 till 1952.
Under the covername Dr Horn he was responsible for the analysis section
in the OG. After 1950 he was also one of the most important advisers of
Chancellor Konrad Adenauer in the field of the rearmament of West
Germany.5 On 30 December 1950, Heusinger wrote a lengthy memorandum
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              131
entitled Thoughts about a future German radio-electronic reconnaissance’,
which recommended that OG devote more resources to Sigint collection.6
He used two sources. First of all, thoughts about the‘Development of radio
intelligence in the former German Wehrmacht’. Besides this source, he was
also privy to detailed information about the, at that time, prevailing Sigint
structures of the Italian and French armed forces. But whatever might
happen– the later Inspector General of the Bundeswehr Heusinger wrote
that the structures should be developed independently from the degree of
their future integration within the relevant military arrangements of the
European Defense Community.7 The planned European defense community
failed in 1954 due to the opposition of the French parliament.8 Heusinger’s
main idea was to create a communication intelligence (Comint)
organization with a secret department subordinated to a federal institute
tasked to collect political, military and economic intelligence in peacetime,
while the future army should be equipped with mobile communication
intelligence units only.
    Like the OG itself, the earliest West German Sigint effort was a creation
of the US Army. In October 1945, some German experts guided by Gehlen’s
colleague and in 1947 chief of his Department I (Humint) Hermann Baun,
performed with American equipment the first Sigint operations against
Soviet troops in Germany from the so-called Bluehouse near Oberursel.9 In
1946, the US Army CIC was instructed to assemble former German
intelligence officers who had worked during World War II in the FHO and
the Reichssicherheitshauptamt (Department of Federal Security, RSHA) at
Camp King near the town of Oberursel, Germany. That same year, the CIC
also invited experts of the former Sigint service of the Wehrmacht to the
town of Bad Vilbel. The aim was to persuade these former German
intelligence officers to create and operate Sigint intercept stations for the
CIC. One of the invitees was Wilhelm Breede, who had served as the
Wehrmacht’s chief cryptanalyst at Smolensk on the Eastern Front, who had
then had transferred in 1945 to General Gehlen’s FHO.10
    General Gehlen recruited a small number of radio intercept and cipher
experts for his OG, such as Leo Hepp, who served as the Director of the OG
Communications Reconnaissance Department at Pullach from 1948 until
1956. His successor was Albert Praun, who was also a former general who
worked in the Wehrmacht radio intelligence organization during World War
II. Hepp returned to BND headquarters at Pullach after a stint with the
Bundeswehr from 1968 to 1970, and was named the Director of Department
II, which managed the BND’s Sigint effort.
    In 1948, the first OG Sigint personnel moved into their new
headquarters at Kransberg Castle near the Hessian town of Butzbach. The
first chief of the Kransberg station was Friedrich Boetzel, a former general
132     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

who ran the Wehrmacht’s radio intelligence section during the latter part of
World War II. From Butzbach, radio traffic originating from the Soviet
Union was intercepted. It was also here that the decryption of all OG radio
intercepts took place under the direction of a former Wehrmacht
cryptanalyst named Erich Hüttenhain. In 1948, construction began on the
first West German High Frequency Direction Finding (HFDF) network,
which stretched from Bremen in the north to Butzbach, and southwards to
Chiemsee in Bavaria.11
    Under Hepp’s leadership, the first OG listening posts were established.12
For example, in 1952 a listening post was opened in the Bavarian town of
Tutzing, which had the mission of monitoring radio traffic coming from
East Germany. In order to conceal the station’s activities, its operations
building was disguised as a commercial company called Südlabor GmbH.
This listening post was closed in 1991.13
    In 1952 the US Army opened an intercept station at Lauf an der
Pegnitz that was manned by former Wehrmacht Sigint personnel. The first
chief of the Lauf station was Wilhelm Flicke, who ran the station during
World War II. The Gehlen Organisation took control of the station in 1952,
but the US Army agreed to subsidize the continued operation of the
Lauf site until 1956.14 A confidential document entitled‘Surveillance Areas
of the Lauf Listening Post’, dated November 1952, shows that the station’s
main target was monitoring Czechoslovakian border patrol traffic and
the radio networks of the Czech internal security service. Using 14 radio
intercept operators, about 2,000 Czech radio transmissions were intercepted
monthly. Two radio intercept operators were assigned to listen to the
radio traffic of the Polish armed forces and the Polish Internal Security
Corps, but only 90 radio messages were intercepted monthly. Two more
intercept operators monitored Hungarian radio traffic, but because of
radio reception problems it was only possible to intercept about 100
Hungarian military messages a month. Finally, the Lauf station was only
able to copy police and weather forecast radio transmissions coming from
Romania.15
    Before the Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz (Agency for Constitutional
Protection, BfV) was established in 1950, OG also had the responsibility for
carrying out the counterintelligence mission. It was also involved in
communications security, as well as intercepting and analyzing the
electronic communications stemming from the Soviet and East European
intelligence services and their clandestine sources in West Germany. Those
functions were later to be taken over by the electronic communications
surveillance service (Funkbeobachtungsdienst), which was subordinated to
the telecommunications branch of the Bundesgrenzschutz (Federal Border
Guard, BGS). The BGS operated four listening posts outside the towns of
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                             133
Heimerzheim, Leer, Lübeck and Rosenheim. The radio traffic intercepted
by these stations, some of which was obtained with computers, was used by
the BfV, the BND, the Zollkriminalamt (customs criminal branch, ZKA)
and for the BGS’s own intelligence requirements.16
    Despite the developments described above, technological intelligence
gathering played a decidedly limited role during the early years of the BND.
In 1957, after the OG became a federal agency, being the Bundesnachrich-
tendienst, Sigint was represented in the BND headquarters staff by only two
small staff units: the Technology and Research Department, and the
Telecommunications/Radio Surveillance Unit of Department III, which was
the Directorate of the BND. However, one must remember that the BND
was still a relatively small organization. As of 1957, the BND’s total staff
consisted of only 1,245 employees.17
    Thirty years later in 1987, Department 2 (Technological Surveillance) of
the BND managed the Sigint collection and processing efforts. This unit had
during the largest extent of the BND, about 7,500 employees and a staff of
2,200 as well as several hundred more employees in Section 14 B for mail
and telecommunications control, in central operations for ciphering, and in
Sub-Department 63 for intelligence services technology and technological
support with its three sections handling intelligence services’technology/
operational control, secret transactions, and technological physics. All were
involved with Sigint. A measure of how greatly the size of the BND’s Sigint
effort increased can be deduced by looking at personnel growth between
1976 and 1997. The BND’s personnel strength was equal in both these years
about 6,000. But the number of BND employees directly engaged in Sigint¬
related duties increased from 475 employees in 1976 to 1,450 employees in
1998, an increase of more than 300 per cent.18

THE SIGINT E A V E S D R O P P E R S OF THE B U N D E S W E H R

Along with the rearmament of the Federal Republic of Germany, in 1956
the West German armed forces began creating military units for the
interception of telecommunications traffic and electronic emissions. At the
request of the BND, the Bundeswehr formed mobile Sigint collection units
along the borders with East Germany and Czechoslovakia for monitoring
radio traffic coming from military manoeuvres taking place in East
Germany, which supplemented the larger permanent stations run by the
BND. Several Bundeswehr Sigint officers and NCOs were trained in their
new responsibilities at BND intercept and direction-finding
establishments.19
    In July 1957, the West German Army activated a temporary Sigint
processing and analysis center in the town of Bergisch-Gladbach, and in
134     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

 1959 the Bundeswehr’s Telecommunications Battalion 51 began
eavesdropping on the HF radio traffic of Soviet military forces stationed in
East Germany. From 1960 until 1962, the first Bundeswehr HF direction-
finding station operated out of the town of Cologne-Ostheim.
    But the strengthening of the West German military’s Sigint intercept and
direction-finding units was not made a priority until after the Cuban Missile
Crisis in October 1962 with the build-up phase lasting until the mid-1960s.
During this period, nearly 20 HFDF sites and four new Sigint battalions
being the Telecommunications Battalions 51, 110, 220, and 320 were
activated. These HFDF stations were stretching from the town of Riepe in
East Friesia in the north all the way to the Bavarian lake Chiemsee in the
south.20 But according to evaluations performed by the BND staff at Pullach,
the Bundeswehr Sigint units were only able to begin performing limited
military intercept missions beginning in 1963 due to personnel and
equipment shortages.
    With respect to the Sigint activities of the German Air Force,
Telecommunications Regiment 71 in Osnabrück and Telecommunications
Regiment 72 at Feuchtwangen were responsible for Sigint collection in the
HF and VHF ranges against the high-level communications of the Soviet Air
Force in East Germany, plus air-to-air and air-to-ground communications of
Soviet and Warsaw Pact air defense units. During 1965–67, the German Air
Force established Sigint intercept towers along the East German and Czech
borders. These were Tower A at Grossenbrode, B at Thuraver Berg, C at
Stöberhai, E at Schneeberg, and F at Hoher Bogen, followed in 1967 by an
HFDF station at the village of Langenargen.21
    The West German Navy also carried out HF eavesdropping operations
from a listening post at the city of Flensburg (adjacent to the Danish
border), as well as tactical Comint and Elint intercepts from a Sigint tower
at Pelzerhaken. In 1958, a headquarters unit, designated Marinefernmeldestab
70, was created at Flensburg to manage all German Navy Sigint operations.
From the early 1960s to the present, the German Navy has operated three
Sigint ships, which mainly perform their mission in the Baltic Sea. When
in 1971 the German Navy bought 16 Breguet Atlantic planes for use as
maritime patrol aircraft, four of these planes were modified for Elint
collection. These aircraft are still stationed at Nordholz Air Base in
northern Germany. During their reconnaissance flights along the East
German border and over the Baltic Sea during the 1980s, the German Sigint
specialists on these aircraft were often accompanied by British and
American intelligence officers. After the end of the Cold War, the Breguet
Atlantic aircraft were used to monitor the United Nations embargo against
Yugoslavia, and flew reconnaissance missions during the 1999 war in
Kosovo.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              135

    However, even before the introduction of the Breguet Atlantic aircraft in
1971, the BND deployed aircraft for Sigint. The former defence minister
(1958-62) and Bavarian prime minister, Franz Josef Strauss, recalls in his
memoirs that the BND in May 1970 overheard from an airborne platform a
telephone conversation between the DDR Prime Minister Willy Stoph and
the DDR leader Walter Ulbricht about a recent visit by the West German
Chancellor Willy Brandt.22
    In 1957, the BND and Bundeswehr began negotiations to determine
their respective Sigint collection and processing responsibilities. The
Army’s aim was to be assigned the area west of the line Riga–Grodno–
Brest–Lvov, including all of East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia and
Hungary. The BND would be tasked with Sigint coverage east of this line,
meaning the western portion of the Soviet Union. During this first battle
between the BND and the Bundeswehr, the BND claimed the overall
responsibility for managing the German national Sigint effort, including a
monopoly on sharing Sigint information with foreign intelligence partners.
The BND was in the end successful, assuming a dominant position over the
Bundeswehr in the Sigint field, which was laid out in a written agreement
between the BND and the Bundeswehr signed in 1958.23

M O D E R N I Z I N G THE BND

When Gerhard Wessel became the new director of the BND in May 1968,
one of his first actions was to appoint a planning committee. In September
1968, this body proposed a new organizational structure for the agency,
which would replace the insanely conspiratorial jungle that was the
hallmark of General Gehlen’s bureaucracy. As an example of the
conspiratorial atmosphere that pervaded the BND headquarters at Pullach,
when General Wessel became the new President of the BND, he discovered
that he immediately became a target of a BND bugging operation. When
Wessel became suspicious that his office and home in Pullach was bugged,
he called in some former friends from the counter-espionage branch of the
Militärischer Abschirmdienst (MAD), which was the Bundeswehr’s
security service. The specialists from Stuttgart checked his house, located
on the grounds of the BND headquarters compound in Pullach, they found
a large number of highly advanced eavesdropping bugs, which had been
placed in all of the rooms of Wessel’s villa, including the toilet.24
    Starting in 1970, the BND’s Sigint infrastructure underwent a massive
overhaul under the Social Democratic governments of Chancellors Willy
Brandt and Helmut Schmidt. One of the results of the planning committee’s
1968 recommendations was the creation in 1970 of a new BND department
dedicated almost entirely to Sigint called Department II, led by Robert
136     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Burchardt. Department II was organized into three primary units: Sub-
Departments IIA and IIB, which managed all BND Sigint collection,
processing, analysis and reporting, Sub-Department IIC, which handled
technological and operational support. The Zentrale für das Chiffierwesen
(Code Coordination Bureau, ZfCh), the BND center for coding and
decoding, also became a sub-department under the Burchardt’s
Administration and Legal Support Staff. Under General Hubertus Grossier,
Burchardt’s successor in 1974, Sub-Departments IID (Technological
Development) and IIZ (Assignments/Operations) were added.
    Also in the early 1970s, all of the BND listening posts scattered
throughout Germany were given the uniform covername‘Federal Site for
Telecommunications Statistics’.25 Even today, the Sigint operations center of
the BND in the Munich suburb of Stockdorf (internally this station is
referred to as‘Object Stellwerk’) is also publicly known as the‘Federal Site
for Telecommunications Statistics, Main Site’. There is also at Stockdorf a
‘Telecommunications Institute’ with the codename ‘Object Planet’. Today,
at least four BND listening posts, such as those located in the towns of
Heiligenhafen, Kassel, Bonn and Butzbach, still carry the public cover
name‘Federal Site for Telecommunications Statistics’, despite the fact that
their real purpose has been publicly known for years.
    As in any secret intelligence service, the BND assigned codenames to all
of its technological intelligence collection programs in order to hide their
activities. For example, Sigint collection systems were given codenames
like‘Susanne’or‘Lerche’. Intercept sites were also given codenames. For
example, one of the Sigint intercept towers situated on the East German
border was called‘Gipfelkreuz’, while the listening post located outside the
town of Krailling was given the codename Object‘Dacapo’. This site was
closed in 1994. Intelligence reports derived from specific Sigint collection
operations or systems were also assigned their own separate codenames,
such as‘Seelachs’,‘Stimmgabel’,‘Reingewinn’,‘Hummer’or‘Tamburin’.
    Among the few advantages that West Germany had as a frontline state
was that it was perfectly positioned from a geographical standpoint to closely
monitor the radio and electronic emissions emanating from the Warsaw Pact
military forces in neighboring East Germany and Czechoslovakia. Its
geographic position on the forward edge of the potential battlefield also
meant that German Sigint could hear targets deeper in the Soviet hinterland
than Western intercept sites situated in countries further back.
    However, these opportunities were not fully exploited by the German
government’s intelligence services during the 25 years following the end of
World War II. This is documented in a Top Secret memorandum written on
2 October 1970 by the BND’s deputy director, Dieter Blötz. He stated,
among other things, that:
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                               137
     The Sigint equipment employed in the FRG, especially at the BND’s
     H sites (Horchposten) with its present staff of about 850 operatives
     and the Bundeswehr’s Sigint units are far from sufficient in order to
     fully exploit the good opportunities offered in the FRG for the
     collection of information by electronic means. This is true for political
     as well as for military information. Due to special circumstances, the
     BND was barely able to maintain its Sigint coverage during the past
     two years at existing levels... The Sigint surveillance program needs
     long-term technological as well as long-term staffing development
     programs.26
    This caused quite a few problems in those days because German
Chancellery-Minister Horst Ehmke had demanded from the BND more
political and less military intelligence information. Above all, he wanted to
be better informed about developments in East Germany. But the BND’s
Sigint capabilities were not capable of responding to this request. On 27
January 1971 Deputy Director Blötz complained in a secret memorandum
that the BND was producing virtually no intelligence information in the
areas of politics, commerce or transportation, and that the sole existing
intelligence expertise in these areas resided with the Bundeswehr.27
    These military eavesdropping operations were known within the
Bundeswehr as eavesdropping programs‘ K o l c h o s e ’and‘Concordia’. It
also comprised Operation‘Nachernte’, which intercepted radio traffic
passing along point-to-point radio links in Czechoslovakia and the ‘Roman’
and ‘Spinne’ programs, which intercepted East German military traffic for
the Bundeswehr and East German political communications traffic for the
BND that was carried on East German point-to-point command nets. This
massive eavesdropping operation was called ‘Laus’. The programs
‘Kolchose’ and ‘Concordia’ were combined in 1972 and funded in the 1973
budget with over 4 million DM.28
    In September 1971 Blötz asked the BND’s director of technology to
determine how many new staff members would be required in order to
conduct the‘ L a u s ’Sigint operation around-the-clock. He also wanted to
know which radio frequencies used on the East German point-to-point radio
system could still be monitored.29
    However, in order to intensify its Sigint collection operations, in April
1972 the BND requested from the Bundeswehr an extra 228 staff positions
above the authorized manning level of 838 military personnel in order to
raise the Sigint output of the BND.30 At the same time, Blötz requested that
the Bundeswehr ease the pressure on the Sigint program of the BND by
assuming more responsibility in the area of Sigint on military targets. For
this reason Blötz strongly protested against an internal proposal by the
138     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

administrative director of his own intelligence service who planned in
February 1975 to downsize by 20 per cent the number of military personnel
assigned to the‘Concordia’Sigint program.31
    From 1982 onward, under the Christian-Liberal government of
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the BND’s Sigint reconnaissance programs grew
dramatically in importance. Sigint was less dangerous than the work of
clandestine agents overseas, and because high-quality Sigint could be traded
to foreign intelligence services in return for a great deal of secret material.
In 1988, the BND’s Department 2 (Technological Surveillance) consisted
not only of a headquarters staff unit, Sub-Department 20A (command
support), but also three other sub-departments. These were:
    UA 22 (Technological Surveillance 1), which consisted of three
sections:‘Intelligence Acquisition, Military, Politics, Economy’,‘Central
Intelligence Processing’, and ‘Operational Procedures and Support’
(planning and organization).
    Then came UA 23 (Technological Surveillance 2, Radio Traffic
Monitoring) with its three sections:‘Intelligence Acquisition Politics,
Economy, Technology, Science’, ‘Central Intelligence Processing’, and
‘Operational Procedures and Support’ (technological evaluation).
    Finally, there was UA 24 (Support/Intelligence Technology), which
consisted of five sections‘Control and Project Processing’,‘Intelligence
Technology’,‘Technological Provisions’,‘Technological Data Processing
Support’, and the‘Telecommunications Liaison Service’, which handled
Sigint liaison with German intelligence stations abroad.
    Whenever Sigint traffic is analyzed, intelligence analysts typically
comb through available computer databases using key word searches as
they look for pertinent information. During the 1970s, the BND often used
the computer facilities of its American partner services, such as the
American Sigint computer database called‘Cherry Glove’,32 which the
BND used in its in-house‘ A u s t i n ’ project, a system to filter
telecommunication by key words. However, during the 1980s it carried out
cost-intensive modernization programs of its complete technological realm.
This took place in the framework of the so-called ‘Nose Ahead’
undertaking. This venture was proclaimed in 1993 by the executive officer
of Department 2, BND Admiral Gerhard Güllich. During the 1990s, the
German intelligence community became increasingly interested in
monitoring cellular telephone traffic as well as the communications passing
through the Internet as the number of network providers in the international
marketplace increased.
    Under Gerhard Wessel, President of the BND from 1968 to 1979, the
 BND was not the only body within the German intelligence community
 whose Sigint efforts took giant steps ahead. Wessel also intensified Sigint
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                139
cooperation and liaison programs. Domestically, the BND improved its
Sigint relationship with the Bundeswehr, despite the fact that the
relationship among the two parties was oftentimes contentious and even
sometimes somewhat disagreeable. Improved international cooperation was
achieved by fine-tuning common Sigint interests between the BND and its
foreign intelligence partners.
    Pursuant to the terms of the secret ‘Zugvogel’ agreement, dated 10
October 1969, and a separate document entitled ‘Guidelines for the
Cooperation Between the Bundeswehr and the Bundesnachrichtendienst in
the Fields of Telecommunications Surveillance and Electronic
Surveillance’, a division of labor between the military and the BND was
worked out. According to the agreement, the BND’s president was
responsible for overall planning, the assignment of tasks, and the overall
coordination of the German national Sigint effort.33
    To help the German Navy with its staffing and equipment problems,
BND Vice President Blötz requested in late 1974 from the Americans three
mothballed US Navy vessels which the German Navy wanted to use to
improve their Sigint ‘take’ in the Baltic Sea. But at that time the Ministry of
Defense was hoping to build three of its own Sigint collection ships, which
it hoped would be approved by 1975.34 On 5 December 1974 Blötz once
again tried to obtain the ships from the Americans, and also suggested
increased coordination of Sigint activities among American, British and
German naval vessels. All three nations wanted to include Denmark in the
program. Blötz wrote that he thought that getting Denmark to participate in
this multinational program was ‘attainable’.35 But it was only in October
1976 that the Danish government finally agreed to participate in the
seaborne Baltic Sea Sigint surveillance operation.36
    Information to be exchanged pursuant to this agreement was intelligence
information obtained by German Navy land-based Sigint stations, such as
the German Navy’s Sigint and direction finding stations at Marienleuchte
on Fehmarn, or the Navy’s Sigint Tower M at Pelzerhaken near Neustadt.
At Pelzerhaken, the BND worked together with the intercept operators of
the German Navy, just as it did at the Navy’s HFDF site at Husum. Since
the mid-1960s, the German Navy’s primary HF listening post had been
located at Twedterfeld near the city of Flensburg.
    In September 1975, the BND agreed to allow the Bundeswehr
temporarily to use its HFDF site in Husum.37 In August 1976, the Army and
the BND signed a formal bilateral Sigint cooperation agreement.38 The BND
wanted to concentrate its Sigint effort on strategic targets well beyond East
Germany, such as Soviet strategic communications links, Soviet military air
transport units, and on Soviet airborne and air mobile forces. One such
typical Sigint program was called Operation ‘Orlog’, where up until the
140     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

mid-1970s the air-to-air and air-to-ground radio traffic of Soviet aircraft
was intercepted. The BND wanted create a warning mechanism in case the
Soviet military began airlifting large numbers of Soviet troops to East
Germany.39
    However, in March 1976 Blötz sent a letter to General Harald Wust, the
Inspector General of the Bundeswehr, stating that the German Sigint
Coordination Committee could only gradually transfer to the Bundeswehr
the Sigint mission of monitoring the telecommunications networks of
Soviet military forces in East Germany and Czechoslovakia. This included
Sigint targeting against Soviet air and air defense units, as well as against
the communications of the East German Army. In the letter it was also
pointed out that the West German Air Force and Army were still a long way
away from being able to carry out these missions on their own. Because the
Bundeswehr could not assume these missions, this would force the BND to
employ one-quarter of its Sigint staff on military-related Sigint missions in
Eastern Europe. This meant that the BND would have to commit 100 out of
its 412 Sigint intercept operators and 19 of its 63 Sigint staff at BND
headquarters in Pullach.
    It should be noted that since 1976, the Bundeswehr was supposed to be
responsible for Sigint collection against the East German military, as well
as Soviet forces in East Germany and Czechoslovakia. At the time the
Bundeswehr employed 4,000 soldiers in its active Sigint units, which was
considerably more than the number of Sigint personnel working for the
BND. Sigint coverage of Poland, Hungary, and the western military districts
of the USSR was the responsibility of the BND. However, there were severe
disagreements between the BND and the Bundeswehr. The main issue was
who was responsible for Sigint collection deep inside the Soviet Union,
such as mainline command nets in the Moscow area, which the Bundeswehr
would have loved to monitor, but could not get permission from the BND
to do so.

GROWING COMPETITION

After Defense Minister Hans Apel of the Social Democratic Party (SPD)
formed a new military Sigint Processing and Analysis Center, the Amt für
Nachrichtenwesen der Bundeswehr (ANBw) in Bad Neuenahr-Ahrweiler in
June 1978, he received strong criticism from the opposition party Christian
Social Union (CSU). The CSU member of parliament Friedrich
Zimmermann accused Apel of wanting to start another international
intelligence service during his term of office. He warned Apel about the
existence of a civilian as well as military foreign intelligence-gathering
agencies, which would lead to a ‘hopeless squandering of resources, but not
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              141
to more efficiency’. With those words, Zimmermann carefully voiced the
BND’s unwillingness that soldiers presently seconded to Pullach, would be
posted to the ANBw.40
    Just like the former responsible Amt für Fernmeldewesen (Bureau of
Telecommunications, AFmBw), the ANBw had no command authority at
all over all of the Bundeswehr’s various Sigint resources. Rather, it
remained dependent on the army, navy and air force’s Sigint yield, as well
as on their competing interests. In 1966 the armed forces command staff had
recommended the creation of joint-service direction-finding sites, but it was
not until 1988 that the first Bundeswehr’s direction-finding network, with
five fixed HFDF sites linked via a digital communications system, was put
into operation. The Navy’s Direction-Finding Site I was at Husum, the Air
Force’s Direction-Finding Site II in Eriskirch, the Army’s Direction-Finding
Site II (codename ‘Zitrone’) in Diepholz, the Army’s Direction-Finding Site
III (Codename ‘Winzer’) in Mainz-Schwabenheim, and at the village of
Übersee on Chiemsee was the Army’s Direction-Finding Site V (Codename
‘Weide’). DF Sites I and V were disbanded in 1992.41
    The ANBw itself carried out some additional collection under the
codename ‘Grau’ but in addition processed and evaluated intelligence
information obtained by Sigint. The Fm radar site near the Army’s Sigint
processing analysis center ‘Schwarz’ in Daun, which was subordinate to the
ANBw, dealt with the so-called ‘black holes’ in the military’s Sigint
coverage through the use of dedicated mobile Sigint intercept units. The
three Corps-level Sigint battalions, Telecommunications Battalions 120,
220, and 320, operated their own intercept sites and parallel HFDF stations,
designated ‘Rot’ at Rotenburg/Wümme, ‘Blau’ at Donauwörth, and ‘Grün’
at Frankenberg. An additional German Army HFDF station was located at
the town of Meitingen. In 1994 all these corps telecommunications
battalions were restructured and became Eloka (electronical warfare,
Elektronische Kampfführung)] telecommunications battalions.42
    From 1990 onwards, many German Sigint installations were downsized
or closed following the end of the Cold War. The German Army abandoned
its Sigint intercept towers along the East German and Czech borders, and
the three Sigint companies, which had manned these sites
(Telecommunications Companies 945, 946 and 947) were disbanded. The
Sigint site at Dannenberg on the East German border, which had been
jointly operated with the British Army’s 13th Signal Regiment, was
vacated. The same thing happened at the US military’s Elint intercept
station at Wobeck on the East German border.
    One exception was the Sigint installation at Kötzting. It was kept in
operation even after the restructuring of the Bundeswehr’s Sigint
infrastructure was completed in 1994. A measure of just how unexpected
142       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                                   MAP 5.1
        LISTENING, DIRECTION-FINDING AND RADAR INSTALLATIONS OF
                          THE BUNDESWEHR 1989


                                                 Flensburg
Husum   Listening, Direction-finding and Radar                  Marienleuchte

        Border towers
                                                                                         Grossenbrode
        Radar                                                              Pelzerhaken
                                                      Husum
        Direction-finding


        Listening


                                                                                       Thurauer Berg

                                          Tarmstedt

                                                         Rotenburg


                               Diepholz




                                                             Stöberhai




                              Goddelsheim

                                          Frankenberg


                Ahrweiler


          Daun
                                                                                      Hof


                            Mainz
                                                                                     Schneeberg




                                                                                               Hoher Bogen

                                                                Donauwörth

                                                                         Mertingen




                                                                                     Obersee



                                           Langenargen
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                             143
the collapse of the East German regime in November 1989 is demonstrated
by the amount of money spent on the West German’s border Sigint sites.
Between 1987 and 1991, about 14 million DM was spent expanding the
Sigint tower at Stöberhai in the Harz Mountains, and the expansion of the
Sigint tower at Dannenberg, which was finished in 1991 (two years after the
collapse of the East German government) cost about 7 million DM. Both
sites had to be subsequently closed for lack of any eavesdropping operations
for them to do.43
    Since 1991 the German Air Force has been solely engaged in strategic
Sigint collection aimed at the countries that formerly comprised the Soviet
Union. This has required a substantial modernization of the Air Force’s
Sigint facilities. Some Sigint units, such as Telecommunications Sectors C
and Q, were closed. Others were restructured and in the five provinces that
formerly comprised East Germany, the former East German Sigint stations
at Guetzkow and Zodel, managed by the newly created Telecommunications
Sector D in Berlin, were created. At Telecommunications Area 70 in Trier,
roughly 90 million DM was invested between 1992 and 1998 in the
construction of a new Sigint processing and analysis complex buried inside
bunkers at the General von Seidel Barracks. One sizeable German Air Force
Sigint unit, Telecommunications Area 72 in Feuchtwangen, was
restructured although not deactivated.
    In December 1994, the German weekly magazine Der Spiegel wrote that
the change of command at the ANBw from General Dieter Farwick to
General Günther Wenger signaled a revival in the competition between the
ANBw and the BND. The magazine wrote that: ‘Farwick has incurred the
wrath of the BND. Pullach was supposedly to relinquish some areas of
expertise to Farwick’s domain.’ By 1993 there were already some indications
that because of new overseas tasks the Bundeswehr’s resistance against the
BND’s domination of the Sigint field was increasing. An agreement between
the BND and the Bundeswehr signed in August 1992 gave the BND not only
the Sigint coordination role, but also the responsibility determining for
strategic Sigint requirements. This limited the Bundeswehr to operational
and tactical Sigint missions. According to the 23 September 1993 agreement
between the German Chancellery in Bonn, Bundeswehr and BND, the latter
intelligence service was also given the exclusive right to exchange
information with cooperating foreign intelligence partners.44
    It was in this area that BND President Konrad Porzer acknowledged that
tension existed during a June 1994 meeting of the Parliamentary Defense
Committee. General Olshausen, Staff Section Director VI of the armed
forces command staff (Führungsstab der Streitkräfte) pleaded at the
meeting for a ‘complete examination of political, commercial, sociological,
technological-scientific, military-political, and military facts. Only in
144     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

correlation, with inclusion of non-military, but militarily relevant facts is it
possible to recognize crisis-prone developments early on.’ It is of course
manifest to all that the ANBw claim that it was responsible for handling a
complete and worldwide potential crisis identification would sooner or later
lead to a huge conflict with the BND.
     Since the Bundeswehr, as happened during the 1999 war in Kosovo,
poaches on the BND’s traditional hunting grounds using reconnaissance
aircraft like the Breguet Atlantique and the ECR Tornado, unmanned
drones, and Sigint - the traditional domination of the BND over the military
will eventually diminish. Despite the growing competition between the two
parties, during the war in Kosovo the BND and the Bundeswehr were the
epitomy of harmony and cooperation in their relations with their foreign
partners, forming a joint organization called the German ‘National
Intelligence Group’.45

SIGINT JOINT V E N T U R E S IN THE F E D E R A L REPUBLIC OF
GERMANY

In early 1970, within the framework of its ambitious Sigint infrastructure
development plan, the BND checked on the cost of building its own
‘Wullenweber’ antenna system, which is a huge 40-acre circular antenna
farm that had been in use by NSA since the early 1960s. The cost of the new
system was high. In 1972, BND officials estimated the cost of building the
antenna system at ‘133 but probably closer to 160 million DM’,46 (about 36
to 44 million US-$) which was a substantial sum of money at the time. At
the same time, BND officials asked the question as to whether political
intelligence gathering would be really improved by building the new
antenna, or if the system would be used mainly for intercepting military
traffic, since the Bundeswehr would operate the planned antenna system,
referred to within the BND as ‘Object Komtesse’, near the northern German
city of Flensburg.
    In April 1971, Minister of Defense Helmut Schmidt recommended to the
German Chancellor’s intelligence services coordinator, Horst Ehmke, that
the planned antenna system be dedicated to political coverage rather than to
military targets. But ‘lasting discrepancies’ between the BND and the
Bundeswehr over whether the antenna would be used for military or
political surveillance were not resolved. The result was that the costs
involved and differences between the BND and the Bundeswehr forced the
Germans to kill the plan to build their own giant antenna system, and
instead turn to the US for assistance.
    During the early summer of 1973 Vice President Blötz asked the CIA’s
Chief of Station in Munich, Arthur Stimson, in a letter if the BND could
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              145
install 75 radio intercept receivers and 6 direction finding positions inside
the American listening post at Augsburg-Gablingen in southern Germany.
This station was equipped with the AN/FLR-9 ‘Wullenweber’ antenna
system. He also asked if it was possible to participate in NSA’s HFDF
network, which stretched from London to Turkey. However the competitor
of the BND, the Bundeswehr, also wanted to move into the Augsburg
listening post.
     The battle between the two organizations came to a head during a
meeting on 28 August 1973 between Blötz and the Deputy Inspector-
General of the Bundeswehr Karl Schnell. Blötz was shocked to find that the
Bundeswehr had invited several representatives of the National Security
Agency (NSA) to the meeting to discuss the Augsburg station. The BND
vice president was surprised about two issues.
     First of all, why had the Bundeswehr not yet submitted its plan for the
joint use of Augsburg to the BND? This had been agreed upon via an
agreement signed in late July 1973.
     Second, why did the Bundeswehr not stick to the ‘from us urgently
requested restraint to talk with the Americans about this subject’? Blötz
regarded this as a manifest violation. Brigadier General Karl Heinz Page
countered that a proposal had been submitted to the BND already quite
some time ago. In addition he claimed that the Bundeswehr had not held
talks with US representatives nor were they planning to do so in the near
future. However, during a break in the meeting, one of the Bundeswehr
generals present at the meeting showed Blötz the agenda for the next day’s
meeting of the Combined Group Germany (CGG), which was the joint
NSA-GCHQ Sigint liaison office in Munich. The meeting was to be
attended by British and American intelligence officers, and one of the items
on the agenda was the ‘Wullenweber’ installation. The BND vice president
learned then and there that General Page had lied to him about not talking
with the Americans.47
     Further negotiations were planned to be held at BND headquarters on 19
September 1973 concerning the joint use of the US Army Field Station at
Augsburg (the covername for the Augsburg site was ‘Drehpunkt’).
However, the planned participation at the meeting by members of the
Bundeswehr was cancelled at the request of the CIA and NSA. The BND
then snubbed the Bundeswehr headquarters at Hardthöhe with the
suggestion that senior BND officials from Pullach would separately brief
 selected military officers during the autumn of 1973 about missions, future
plans, and capabilities in the context of the BND as the sole German foreign
intelligence service.
     On 21 January 1974, Blötz submitted the findings of a panel of experts
to the Bundeswehr’s Deputy Inspector-General Karl Schnell:
146     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

      After integrating the German participants (BND and Bundeswehr)
      into the [Augsburg] station, the independence of the [German Sigint]
      processing control and mission implementation shall remain intact.
      Our own recording systems would be attached to the US antenna.
      Thus the joint use of the US mammoth direction-finding facility is
      possible.
Blötz also remarked that the Federal Republic of Germany would profit
from this accord because it would give them access for the first time to
NSA’s worldwide Sigint collection and reporting system. However, he did
not conceal the snag: ‘To accomplish this, the first step was for the FRG’s
telecommunications eavesdropping by the BND and Bundeswehr be linked
to the US switching center at Augsburg.’48 On 5 February 1974, during a
visit to NSA’s headquarters at Fort Meade, Blötz signed the ‘Drehpunkt’
agreement in a ‘festive ceremony’. This agreement gave the green light to
begin two Bundeswehr construction projects at Augsburg: a new West
German listening post inside the Augsburg station called Telecommunications
Site South, as well as a similar program for a BND station at Augsburg.49
    In October 1978, the BND noted that the results of its direction-finding
work at Augsburg (‘Drehpunkt’) had worsened because the capacity of the
American HFDF network to handle the increased workload was
insufficient.50 It seemed that the German requests for direction-finding plots
and position reports were always placed at the tail end of the long queue
behind the US HFDF missions. Even after the BND liaison staff with NSA
had moved during the 1980s from a villa in the Munich suburb of Krailling
to Gablingen, the Germans there remained second-class citizens, with most
of the station’s operational facilities remaining out of bounds to them.51
    Sigint collaboration between the West German intelligence services and
NATO Sigint units in Germany started slowly under Chancellor Brandt, but
accelerated beginning in the summer of 1974 under Chancellor Schmidt.
Towards the end of 1973, BND Vice President Blötz visited the American
listening post at Teufelsberg in West Berlin ‘to find out whether our joint
endeavors with the Americans are paying dividends’. In July 1974, the BND
and the Americans formed a joint working group concerning Sigint
collection and processing by their intercept sites arrayed along the East
German and Czechoslovak borders, followed by a second joint working
group concerning Sigint collection against satellites and other space
vehicles. The BND staff member ‘Springmann’ (cover name) headed the
former working group.
    But discussions about improving joint US-German Sigint efforts only
took on a sense of urgency after US Secretary of Defense James R.
Schlesinger (July 1973-November 1975) advocated improving and
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                147

optimizing the efficiency of certain partnership relationships within NATO,
including Sigint relationships with US allies in Europe. This led in 1974 to
the initiation of secret talks at Pullach designed to create what BND officials
described as a ‘Sigint Trinity’, comprising the BND, NSA and the British
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ).
     Blötz noted in a memorandum that: ‘The director of GCHQ, John
Burrough, already carefully hinted at such a trilateral discussion level.’
According to Blötz this idea was very obviously talked over by Burrough
and NSA Deputy Director Buffham who had known each other already for
many years and were personal friends. According to Blötz a deal was made
‘so that in each of their separate discussion with me, their willingness for
trilateral top-level deliberations could be manifested’.51 These trilateral
discussions began in London in January 1975, focusing on cooperation with
the BND on two of its Sigint programs, Operations ‘Laus’ and ‘Roman’, as
well as collaboration in the field of space Sigint.
    Concurrently, the BND staff at Pullach began coordinating for the first
time ever with the NSA liaison officer to the BND in Munich, Bayard
Keller, which American or German intercept stations would copy and
process East German communications traffic.53 In June 1975, Blötz
expressed his thanks to Buffham for the good trilateral cooperation taking
place in Augsburg and Munich, assessed these cooperative efforts: ‘As the
first step on the road towards steadily improving mutual Sigint
cooperation’.54
    However, behind the scenes the BND and the Bundeswehr were
concerned about giving so much Sigint information to the US and Britain,
with a BND official writing in November 1975 that ‘caution [was in order
because] of the eventual intentional hemorrhaging of Sigint information’.
This resulted in the Germans delaying on improving Sigint relations with
the US and Britain. But the Americans pushed harder, and requested in
October 1976 better coordination of effort with German military Sigint
authorities in the areas of intercept, processing and communications. At the
same time, the Americans asked the Germans to agree in writing to provide
NSA with copies of raw German ‘Roman’ Sigint reports, and not just the
more general ‘Laus’ intelligence summaries based on Sigint. Even before a
written agreement was drafted, BND Vice President Blötz agreed that the
German Navy Sigint unit, Naval Telecommunications Staff 70, would
supply NSA with the ‘Skateboard’ material collected by this staff on
military activities in the Baltic Sea.55
    The Americans had other requests. First, the Americans wanted any
materials intercepted by the German Air Force Sigint towers along the East
German border that referred to NSA’s Teufelsberg listening post in West
Berlin. Second, they desired an agreement with the Bundeswehr concerning
148     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

cooperation in the field of VHF direction finding field. Both of these
requests the Bundeswehr Deputy Inspector-General was willing to grant.56
    In December 1976, the French Sigint agency, the Direction Général de
Sécurité Extérieur (DGSE), entered the picture. Vice President Blötz noted
a suggestion from ‘Narzisse’ (codename for the French intelligence) to
broaden French participation of the BND Operation ‘Laus’.57 Although
France was not militarily integrated into NATO, it maintained listening
posts on German soil at Bahrsdorf in the Harz mountains, at Appen north of
Hamburg, and a major intercept station at Landau. Next to its radio intercept
site in Berlin-Spandau, the BND also operated a listening post jointly with
its French partner at the Berlin Tegel airport. The BND concealed the site,
called the Arbeitsgruppe für Vergleichsuntersuchungen (Working Group for
Comparative Research) from the British and Americans,58 and reports
coming from the station were assigned the special codenames ‘Eisberg’ and
‘Sandwüste’. Both of these listening posts were closed after the end of the
Cold War.59 Today, the BND’s presence in the new German capital is limited
to a few leased antenna aerials mounted on top of the Alexanderplatz
television tower in downtown Berlin.60
    Throughout the Cold War, the Federal Republic of Germany steadily
took over new Sigint tasks from the Americans. In 1969 the US Air Force
border intercept station in the Bavarian town of Hof was taken over by the
Amt für Nachrichtenwesen der Bundeswehr (ANBw) as a Comint and Elint
intercept station. This site operates an AN/FLR-12 antenna system and was
originally established by the then CIA Office of Elint (OEL). The Hof
collection site was sold for $1 in return for data exchange rights.61 And
in the mid-1990s the huge American Sigint collection station at Gablingen
was taken over by the German military, and is now known as
Telecommunications Station South of the Bundeswehr.62
    In 1988, a new BND Sigint collection station was opened at Bad Aibling
Station in southern Germany to intercept tropospheric-scatter radio links in
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. The station was officially
known under the name of Fernmeldeweitverkehrsstelle (Telecommunications
Site). Its secret codename was ‘Object Seeland’, which was later renamed
as ‘Object Orion’. It proved its worth in 1991 when the BND could provide
the German government with important intelligence information about the
coup d’état against Mikhail Gorbachev on the basis of Sigint collected by
the station proving that the coup leaders did not have the support of the
Soviet military.63
    This joint US-BND station is now the second largest US eavesdropping
installation in Europe after the NSA base at Menwith Hill in Britain. The
German intelligence staff at Bad Aibling is not allowed access to the data
collected by NSA at this station. This has nurtured suspicions on the part of
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                                                   149
                                             MAP 5.2
            RECONAISSANCE INSTALLATIONS OF THE BND 1989


    BFmS = Bundesstelle für Fernmeldestatistik




                                                                    Heiligenhafen BFmS
                                              Husum BFmS




                                                                                        West-Berlin
                                                                                        Tegel
                                                                                        Horchstelle Spandau
                                           Hannover DDR-TV


                                           Braunschweig BFmS
                                                Schöningen BFmS                     Stationen im Ausland:

                                                                                    * Lecce, Italien
                                                                                    * Conil, Spanien
                                                                                    * Beirut, Libanon
                                           Kassel BFmS
                                                                                    * Kourou, Fr.-Guayana
                                                                                    * Pamir-Gebirge, China
                                                                                    * Taipeh, Taiwan
                                                                                    * ...

           Bonn BFmS


     Monschau-Höven BFmS
                                Butzbach BFmS




               Achern Horchstelle BFmS

                                            Gabiingen Femmeldestelle Süd
                                                                                 Kreuzholzhausen Funkstelle
                                                         Stockdorf BFmS              München BFmS
                                                         Krailling Horchstelle
        Rheinhausen lonospähren-lnstitut
                                                         Pöcklng BFmS
                                                         Tutzing BFmS             Bad Aibling Weitverkehrstelle
150     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

many German intelligence experts that the US is conducting industrial
espionage against the Federal Republic of Germany from the base.64 In
November 1999, German Undersecretary for Intelligence Affairs Ernst
Uhrlau and BND President August Hanning were allowed to visit Bad
Aibling Station. After the visit, Uhrlau stated that NSA Director General
Michael V. Hayden had given him a guarantee that no German interests
were being violated by the station’s intelligence work. Uhrlau told the
German weekly magazine Der Spiegel that Bad Aibling Station conducted
no economic espionage against German firms.65
    However, an insider early in 2000 told the author of this article in Der
Spiegel that while Uhrlau and Hayden’s statements in November 1999 were
correct, in fact NSA’s economic espionage against Germany had been
transferred to Menwith Hill Station in Britain. The main economic focus of
the Bad Aibling listening post was now Switzerland and Liechtenstein and
in particular banking transactions and money laundering.66

SATELLITE R E C O N N A I S S A N C E

On 30 June 1975 the contract of the BND with the Institute for Space
Exploration in Bochum lapsed. For some years the university’s institute had
to study Soviet satellite communications and deliver the results to the BND.
The intelligence service demanded the return of its devices worth 400,000
DM, which the Institute had been loaned by the Zentralstelle für das
Chiffrierwesen of the BND.67 This was because the German intelligence
community had in the past not shown very much interest in the Institute’s
endeavors in the field of monitoring Soviet satellite communications.
However, this did not mean a final farewell from eavesdropping through
satellite emissions at all. However, as a place in time it was simply out of
step.
    In January 1975, the BND had presented its first plan for space
reconnaissance to the joint German/American ‘Asmara’ working group.68
This group that had been created under the direction of the BND staff
member ‘Kreipe’ (covername) in July 1974.69 In late July 1976, BND
General Hubertus Grossier, chief of BND Department II, presented the first
comprehensive study of West German space and satellite eavesdropping
activities.70 At the time, the BND was already operating a few ground
stations that were intercepting foreign satellite transmissions. In Brunswick,
a station of the Federal Bureau for Telecommunications of the BND
concentrated on monitoring Inmarsat communications satellite
communications, while a Trial Station of the Federal Bureau for
Telecommunications, located in a quarry near the city of Schöningen, was
also engaged in satellite communications intercept.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                 151
     The most notable BND asset used for space Sigint collection was an
installation disguised as a government scientific establishment called the
‘Ionosphere Institute’ in Rheinhausen, Germany. The total budget to build
this ‘Object Packhouse’ was about 90 million DM (about $25 million), with
the money coming out of the German Federal Postmaster’s budget.71 In
1971 this station, which within the BND was designated ‘Service
Department 525’,72 received a new B6 parabolic satellite antenna.
     However, in the summer of 1971 the BND staff member responsible for
the project, ‘Dr Göing’ (covername), wrote a report questioning the
effectiveness of the antenna, stating that he foresaw ‘unjustifiable costs’ in
view of the rather modest use it had received up to that point.73 The site’s
refurbishment dragged on.
     Finally, in October 1976 NSA offered to supplement the station’s
equipment and provide other technical assistance until the BND was ready for
the final conversion of the station.74 ‘Despite certain limitations in
independence incumbent in the offer, it was decided to acceptNSA’sproposal
of cooperation because it would give us access to the reconnaissance results
of the world-wide [Sigint] collection and radar systems of this partner’,
stressed Blötz in a secret memorandum. Nonetheless, at the same time he had
his staff check out all other possibilities to determine whether he could loosen
the NSA ties ‘by building an operational system on the national level’ and
‘through participation in organizations involved with reconnaissance satellite,
i.e. civilian establishments such as Spacelab or Erts’.75
     Then there was the question of West Germany building a reconnaissance
satellite in conjunction with a European partner. The Inspector-General of
the Bundeswehr Harald Wust asked the Vice President of the BND in
August 1976 an important question. Could the Federal Republic of
Germany do permanently without satellites as a reconnaissance vehicle? He
had been inspired to this ask this because of a discussion he had with the
chief of station of the Japanese intelligence service in Bonn, General Saigo.
The Inspector-General favored a joint effort with Tokyo because the
Japanese approach was so different [and more beneficial] when compared
with the French offer. Paris only seemed to be interested in a financial
contribution by the Germany while having all the industrial manufacturing
done for a proposed system at home.76
     The agenda of the BND as regards the visit of the parliamentary control
commission on 12 April 1989 drew up the balance sheet as regards the
further developments up to the end of the East-West conflict. In 1985, an
inter-ministerial working group chaired by Horst Teltschik, responsible for
the foreign- and security policy in the Chancellery from November 1989
until the end of 1990. It had laid down the domestic requirements of the
Bundeswehr and BND. The proposed German-French cooperation to build
152     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

a spy satellite was rejected in late 1985. At the same time, the BND tried
unsuccessfully to obtain the cooperation of the US intelligence services,
seeking the use of commercial satellite systems such as the French Spot and
the American ‘Landsat’. In 1987, the German Minister for Foreign Affairs
launched a new initiative to revive German-French cooperation to build a
reconnaissance satellite, but Chancellor Kohl let the proposal founder
(probably due to American pressure). At a 1988 Western European Union
(WEU) conference, France formally proposed the construction of a
European reconnaissance satellite. For the Germans, however, this proposal
appeared to be too time-consuming and dependent on too many partners.77
    After the WEU presented its report in November 1987, which included
a cost estimate of 27 billion DM, the German government decided to
participate in the initial or experimental phase of the project, but did not
commit itself to future WEU project participation. A training center and
ground-based processing station for the new satellite was completed at
Torrejon Air Base in Spain, and since November 1995 imagery from the
French-Italian-Spanish Helios I reconnaissance satellites has been
processed and analyzed there.
    In 1989, the BND had its own satellite reconnaissance goals clearly
defined. These were verification and monitoring of the non-proliferation
treaties on ABC weapons of mass destruction; crisis-proof reconnaissance
of nuclear threats (strategic reserves, nuclear mission mechanisms,
operational centers); and indications of crises and wars even in Third World
nations. The service was also interested in early warning of natural and
environmental catastrophes, as well as the accumulation of information
about harvests, natural resources and infrastructures. The BND estimated
that one ground station, one receiving and compiling station, two photo and
two radar satellites, and one data relay satellite were sufficient. The service
favored a binational cooperative solution in which France with its Helios II
mounted photo sensors and the Federal Republic with radio sensors on
Horus would work together.78
     Four billion DM spread over ten years was the cost estimate of the
German share at that time, but presently that has become at least seven
billion. This high cost also motivated Defense Minister Volker Rühe to vote
against the project. However, as a result of his negotiations with the French
President, Chancellor Kohl did not leave any doubt that he preferred the
German-French project above all those American offers for the sale of US
 satellites to Germany. With a mini-Department 40-X directed by its staff
member ‘Beigel’ (covername) plus an analytical albeit embryonic unit,
which in the future would have staff of up to 250 led by his colleague a
 ‘Trendel’ (covername), the BND had adapted itself by 1996 to the
beginning of the active space reconnaissance.79
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                               153
    The cooperative efforts of Paris and Berlin with radar and photo
satellites were only a first step towards the liberation from American
dominance in space-supported reconnaissance. Whether it is the seed of a
budding European service that will germinate into tight German-French
teamwork, will be proven by the collective follow-up All Osiris radio
reconnaissance project, mainly because its operators must allow all other
partners mutual access to their individual reconnaissance priorities and
interests. The Kosovo War has in this respect been a catalyst for greater
French-German cooperation. After US ambassador, John C. Kornblum, said
during the air campaign in a discussion on German TV (Talkshow Sabine
Christiansen) that American generals had decided that the photo satellite
reconnaissance results over the terrain in Kosovo should not be given to the
governments of the other NATO member states, Walther Stützle,
undersecretary at the Defense Ministry in Berlin, answered that this must be
a reason for the German government to support the activities towards
independent satellite intelligence capabilities.

I N T E L L I G E N C E AGENTS’ RADIO COMMUNICATIONS

In the 1974 amended edition of its mission statement, the ‘Intelligence
Service Definitions for the Bundesnachrichtendienst’, referred to the Radio
Transmission Service, which was the BND radio unit that either transmitted
coded instructions at specific frequencies for ‘secret service liaison’ within
Europe, or contacted agents using clandestine radio transmissions. For
example, the BND station in Rome, the Command Center IV from
Marquese de Mistura, in 1968 controlled its own radio station, called Radio
Station Helios, which serviced the BND’s ‘Exchange and Security Region
Mediterranean’.80
   The Schnellinformationsdienst of the BND (Rapid Information Service)
repeated coded messages on all frequencies for recipients outside of
continental Europe, and the Sonderblindfunkdienst (Special Binary
Telegraph System Service) transmitted worldwide coded instructions via
Morse code to specific personnel. With a numbers rapid transmission
device, an electronic memory and telecast mechanism, messages were
swiftly transmitted via radio signals.81
   The BND also perfected rapid telephone transmissions by developing
the ‘Schnellbahn’ system, which could transmit compressed coded
messages to agents in Eastern Europe. The BND also developed radios in
which a ‘Harpune’ receiver was hidden, able to receive the compressed
messages. The BND received DM 20 million by selling this system to some
Western allies. For example, counter intelligence in Poland in 1986 found a
‘Harpune’ receiver arresting British agents.82
154    SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    The BND operated a major radio transmission installation at
Dachau/Kreuzholzhausen. Its secret designation being ‘Object Mühle’, this
station was publicly referred to as a test site of the ‘Federal Bureau for
Telecommunications Statistics’.
    During the 1980s, the BND also used a communications station called
‘Object Alpina’ near the town of Tutzing to transmit messages to
clandestine agents working abroad, as well as send wireless traffic to BND
foreign residences. Despite the fact that the service prevented East German
agents from penetrating its operations, it could do little to protect its
excellent reconnaissance and communications system from the
eavesdroppers of the East German Ministeriums für Staatssicherheit
(Ministry for State Security, MfS). From a listening post with the codename
of ‘Topas’ in Czechoslovakia, the MfS was able to intercept the BND’s
uncoded ‘Alpina’ radio relay traffic to Munich.
    Since the satellite communications links to the legal BND stations in
Cairo and Amman, as well as to the illegal BND base in Damascus, also ran
through this station ‘Object Alpina’ near the town of Tutzing, no secrets
remained hidden from the MfS intercept operators about what was
transpiring between BND headquarters at Pullach and its three Middle East
stations.
    For example, in 1984 the BND station in the Egyptian capital believed
that they had discovered which flat the new East German military attaché
would move into. Following the orders of their headquarters in Pullach in
the Isar valley, the BND agents rented a nearby apartment and equipped it
with plenty of eavesdropping equipment. But the MfS had warned East
German military intelligence well in advance, and the Cairo flat was
subsequently not occupied by the military attaché, but rather by a harmless
foreign trade bureaucrat. The expensive eavesdropping equipment brought
in from West Germany specifically for the operation was used for over six
months before the BND eavesdroppers finally realized that their bugging
operation was not monitoring an East German military officer. The MfS
eavesdropping specialists in East Germany noted with great glee that Dr
Becker, the BND chief of station in Cairo, reacted in maniacal rage when he
learned of the disaster.83
     In autumn 1995, the BND once again was enormously shocked when it
turned out that a Southeast European intelligence service had succeeded in
deciphering codes and passwords of the BND’s data transmissions.

THE BND’S RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN I N T E L L I G E N C E PARTNERS

The BND could always count on the secret export of German
communications technology to foster good relations with partner intelligence
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                155

services. In 1958, it sent the King of Saudi Arabia several mobile radio sets
for use by his palace guards. In 1965 it helped the Indonesian military
intelligence service with the overthrow of President Sukarno by sending
radio sets. During the 1970s, the BND sent eavesdropping equipment to
Uganda’s dictator Idi Amin, and during the mid-1980s84 it sent to Libya radar
and surveillance technology, a telephone eavesdropping center, and provided
training support.85 During the late 1980s, telecommunications equipment
labeled ‘Made in Germany’ also went to the guerrilla organization Renamo,
which was trying, with the assistance of South Africa, to destabilize the legal
Mozambique government.86 In April 1986, the BND sent a Sigint station
taken from the Bundeswehr’s stores to Pakistan’s intelligence service
(known within the BND by the codename ‘Eichkatze’).87
    Following the end of the Cold War, German Army intelligence agents
reportedly supplied the Algerian Islamic Salvation Front (AIS) in 1994 with
radio equipment and weapons. The BND supported the AIS of which the
controlling echelon mainly found asylum in Germany in order to break the
French economic monopoly in its former colonies in case of a takeover by
the AIS in Algeria.88 Only after a massive protest by Paris in 1994, was the
secret support of the Algerian opposition abandoned. In 1991, the BND
delivered intelligence related material as computers and cameras to the
value of DM 100,000 to the intelligence service of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, and in 1992, it trained members of the Iranian intelligence service in
its Munich based training center on the use of the computer equipment.89
    In 1991, the BND exported together with the MAD (Militärischer
Abschirmdienst) to Albania telephone surveillance equipment taken from
the stores of the defunct East German Ministry for State Security,90 and they
supported their new intelligence partner in Hungary with Sigint systems
taken from the BND’s abandoned Sigint towers along the former East
German border.
    The BND also made itself at home on foreign shores. For example, in
the summer of 1988 the BND shipped to a Christian militia group in Beirut
via Cyprus a high-tech Sigint intercept facility to expand the Agency’s
sphere of influence in the Near East. At the same time it ensured that it
would have access to the raw data generated by the system. The BND also
dispatched its Sigint specialists to the European Space Center at Kourou in
French Guiana, from where Ariane rockets launched commercial satellites
into orbit. According to French press reports, the BND together with the
French have listened to American communications traffic sent by Inmarsat
and Intelsat communications satellites from Kourou and from another Sigint
station at New Caledonia in the South Pacific.91
    Shortly after the creation of the West German government in 1956, and
the subsequent integration of the Gehlen Organization into the German
156     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

government under the new name of the Bundesnachrichtendienst, the
intelligence service began establishing telecommunications and Sigint sites
outside Germany. It still operates these kinds of sites today. Below are four
examples covering the period from the 1960s to the present.
     First, at the beginning of the 1960s the BND enhanced its already good
liaison relationship with the Turkish secret service by helping it open radio-
electronic eavesdropping stations, like the Turkish station at Samsun on the
Black Sea. The BND also sent some of its staff, among them some
personnel from the BND ‘Homing Station Overseas’ at Chiemsee, to
Turkey to conduct Sigint operations against Russia.92 During the 1970s a
German supply aircraft flew from Munich-Riem airport to Turkey every
week carrying supplies and other materials to support the Turkish technical
and human intelligence programs.93
     Second, in 1967 the BND and the Spanish secret service installed Sigint
equipment at a ranch in La Mancha with the help of a Munich-based BND
commercial proprietary company called Thum & Co. On 26 March 1971,
the Spanish intelligence service, which was referred to within the BND by
the codename ‘Flieder’, sent a telegram to Pullach in which it proposed
taking over the BND Sigint installation in Spain in return for use of the site
in case of war.94 The BND, however, did not pull out of the ranch until after
a modern, state-of-the-art listening post had been built near Cadiz in 1975.
     The purpose of the new and complex Sigint station at Cadiz was to
monitor the communications relay links for the submarine cable that had
their land terminals on the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of Spain and
Portugal. This would allow the BND to break into the communications hub
connecting North and South America, West Africa, Britain and the Arabian
Peninsula. In the spring of 1975, the BND put a five million DM price tag
on this secret station,95 which was called ‘Object Eismeer’. In March 1975,
the Spanish government gave its blessing to the project after its concerns
 about a violation of the Portuguese communications relay system were
 clarified.96 An agreement between the BND and its Spanish counterpart,
 CESID, was signed in Spain in September 1975.96a FN This marked the
beginning of a BND operation called ‘Delikatesse’, which did not end until
 the station was closed in December 1992.
     Third, in the early 1960s the BND established a station on the island of
 Taiwan, and opened on the island what was then one of the most modern
 listening posts yet built. Pullach also helped the Taiwanese with staffing the
 station. For example, during a September 1973 working lunch in Bonn, the
 Vice President of the BND introduced the Taiwanese intelligence chief of
 station in Bonn, Ango Tai, to a BND officer named ‘Prigge’ (covername),
 who was to serve as his intelligence advisor. At the time, Prigge was
 working at the BND’s Brunswick listening post. During the autumn of 1977,
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                157
two BND cipher experts visited the headquarters of the Taiwan intelligence
service, which was referred to within the BND by the codename ‘Frettchen’.
In December 1978, the chief of the German Chancellery agreed to expand
the intelligence cooperation between the BND and Taiwan’s military
intelligence service in the field of satellite intelligence.97
    During the late summer of 1992, the BND gave a computerized Sigint
processing and analysis system worth several hundred thousands of DM to
the Taiwan military intelligence organization, which was installed in a
military barracks in the southern part of the Taiwan capital Taipei. This
system systematically decoded and analyzed communications traffic
obtained by Taiwan from their Sigint collection stations. In 1992, Taiwanese
Sigint personnel were trained in new technology and BND-developed
analytic software at the BND Telecommunications School at Pöcking (which
was publicly known as the Federal Bureau for Telecommunications, Test
Station). This school was affiliated with the Sigint collection and analysis
site called ‘Object Kleefeld.’ In addition, the BND posted three of its
Chinese-speaking staff members to Taiwan for four-year tours at the Taiwan
Sigint processing and analysis center in Taipei.
    Fourth and final example, for monitoring the hinterland of the Soviet
Union, the BND built during the early 1960s an eavesdropping installation
that monitored a huge area using interconnected Sigint intercept stations in
Husum, Lecce in Italy, and Tehran, Iran.98 However, this capability vanished
when the Tehran intercept station was lost during the 1979 Iranian
revolution. The BND, together with the CIA, looked for a replacement site
in the People’s Republic of China. In 1985, this station was opened in the
Pamir mountains near the Afghan border in the presence of a high-ranking
delegation from the German Parliamentary Control Commission for the
Intelligence Services. A German Sigint liaison officer has been posted at the
German embassy in Bejing since 1985.
    The Afghan Ministry of Intelligence Affairs (WAD), until the Afghani
regime fell in May 1992, carried out an operation against the station, which
in the late 1980s provided intelligence support to the mujahedin fighters in
Afganistan. WAD agents bought the listening post’s garbage from Chinese
civilians and found out that the American as well as German intelligence
services at the station also collected intelligence against their Chinese
hosts.99 While the United States pulled out of these stations in protest of the
Chinese human rights policy during the early 1990s, the BND Sigint station,
designated Operation ‘Lanze’, still continues to this day.
    August Hanning, the President of BND since November 1998, visited
the town of Gudermes in the Russian breakaway province of Chechnya in
early March 2000 to share intelligence with the Russian foreign intelligence
service, the SVR, whose BND covername is ‘Sequoia’. The intelligence
158     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

information dealt with, among other things, with the support that the
Chechen rebels were receiving from Islamic terrorists, mainly from
Afghanistan, such as Osama bin Laden. It has been the information from the
Pamir Sigint station, in addition to the BND’s old connections to the Afghan
mujahedin, which enabled Mr Hanning to deliver important and exclusive
information to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s foreign intelligence
service. In a first reaction the BND said that its chief only had a look at the
situation there. Two days later, the German government declared that there
had been some cooperation with the Russians in the area of combating
international terrorism within the framework of the G-8 nations, but that
there had been no direct assistance given to the Russian army in
Chechnya.100 On 17 April 2000, Mr Hanning briefed the press on the role of
terrorists in the region, but denied that the BND has a listening post in the
Pamir mountains.101
    Operation ‘Lanze’ was not the only joint venture between the German
and Chinese intelligence services. Since the 1989 massacre at Tianamen
Square in Bejing, 50 Chinese intelligence experts have visited Germany to
negotiate agreements in areas of common interest. The Chinese wanted a
quid pro quo, and claimed support in controlling the Chinese democratic
opposition in China and abroad. As a consequence of this Chinese-German
cooperation, in 1991 the Munich-based electronics firm Rhode & Schwarz
delivered some PA 055 eavesdropping antennas and audio surveillance
‘bugs’ to China. These were used to monitor the movements of foreign
diplomats and journalists in Beijing by car in order to determine where they
would meet opposition members, most of whom were students.102
    Intelligence personnel from smaller countries have also been trained by
BND experts. For example, between 1982 and the end of the 1980s, German
specialists traveled twice a year to meet with officials from the Brazilian
foreign intelligence service, which the BND assigned the covername
‘Biber’. Their job was to train their Brazilian colleagues in the correct use
of audio surveillance bugs.103 Nevertheless, the BND and its most important
partners have carried out joint operations in the Sigint field. Bob Woodward
in his 1987 book VEIL reported on the work of joint CIA-NSA Sigint units
operating inside US embassies abroad, which were known as Special
Collection Sites:
      The CIA and the NSA had developed techniques barely imagined by
      the host countries ... phone lines and rooms could be tapped or
      bugged without physical intrusion or connection. Room conversations
      could sometimes be picked up from the windows by electronically
      measuring the vibrations of the window glass with a small, invisible
      beam.104
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                             159

     One such example of close Sigint cooperation involving the BND
happened in Libya. Since there was no American embassy in Libya, it was
impossible for the CIA and NSA to place a SCS Sigint site in that country.
The CIA asked the BND for help, and the BND responded by opening a
station inside the German embassy in Tripoli in January 1987. From inside
the German embassy, German intelligence specialists tapped and bugged
the embassies of East Bloc nations as well as the communications facilities
of the Libyan government, and delivered the results of these operations to
their American partners.105
     Four secret BND documents pertaining to a joint operation conducted
with the Israeli secret service, the Mossad, in Germany raise questions about
whether these special collection operations were really an American
invention. On 8 September 1975, the Vice President of the BND, Dieter
Blötz, met the Israeli Mossad chief of station in Paris, David Kimche, who
told him that the Mossad had developed a new laser measuring system for
conducting bugging operations. He also said that Mossad would like to use
this technology for the first time in Germany for an attack on the Egyptian
military attaché stationed in the German capital Bonn. A flat near his house
had already has been rented for this purpose. Kimche also offered the
proliferation and discussion on the new technology with specialists from
BND. Blötz agreed to the proposed operation three weeks later.106
     On 16 October 1975, Mossad and BND experts met. They agreed that a
prototype of the system had to be built by January 1976, and then tested
during an eavesdropping operation. The BND officer involved in the
operation was a Mr Grad, who about a month later became BND chief of
 station in Morocco. Grad also found a target for a second test. Both tests
were done together. However, the operation in Bonn was carried out
 exclusively by Mossad, who nonetheless shared the results of the operation
 with Pullach.107

CRYPTOGRAPHY

During a conversation with the Permanent Secretary of the German
Chancellery, Franz Schlichter, the Vice President of the BND on 19 January
1978 complained that the Code Coordination Bureau (ZfCh), was
completely omitted from the new description of tasks to be performed by
the BND. But the Permanent Secretary thought that the omission was a
better idea than if ‘suddenly it should be made public what kind of contact
exists between the BND and the ZfCH’.108 However, the relationship
between the BND and the ZfCH involved more than simple ‘contacts’,
because until 1989 the Center for Ciphering, located at the Mehlemer Kreuz
in Bonn-Bad Godesberg, was officially a unit (Sub-Department 62) of the
160     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

BND. The ZfCH consisted of five sections, namely: General Cryptography
and Central Tasks, Mathematics, Crypto-Technology, Decoding A, and
Decoding B. Its primary emphasis was not cryptanalysis, but rather the
encoding of information, for which it acted as the Executive Agent for the
entire German government. It was for this particular reason that the BND
instructed the Bundeswehr in March 1975 ‘to eliminate all crypto¬
technological devices which could have been compromised by an officer in
the (Bundeswehr) Bureau of Telecommunications suspected of having
committed espionage’, presumably for East Germany, and requested the
help of the Director of the ZfCh in implementing this order.109
    The genesis of the ZfCH can be traced back to 1947, when a former
Wehrmacht cryptanalyst named Erich Hüttenhain brought together a small
group of former German Army cryptologists at the US Army base at Camp
King outside the town of Oberursel, which became an integral part of
the Gehlen Organization’s nascent Sigint unit, then called the Study Group
for Scientific Investigation. In 1950, with the permission of the Allied
High Commission, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs installed Section 114 as
a cryptographic service under the direction of Adolf Paschke. The
members of its scientific advisory committee were some of the best
cryptologists in Germany, including Erich Hüttenhain, Kurt Selchow,
Rudolf Schauffler, and Heinz Kuntze. With the decision to rearm the
Federal Republic of Germany, this section was closed in 1955, and all of
its coding and decoding responsibilities were transferred to the BND in
1956. The Bundeswehr limited itself to simple cryptographic (coding)
responsibilities.110
    The science of cryptology is characterized by a constant and never-
ending race between the makers and breakers of codes, with usually the
codemakers coming out on top. That is why BND Vice President Blötz
warned in an 28 August 1973 speech at the Richthofen hall at Hardthöhe
that it was becoming increasingly difficult to decipher encrypted radio
traffic. He emphasized that communications security meant that more staff
and fiscal resources were needed to keep up with the improvements in
codemaking. However, the BND’s dominant position in cryptography
proved to be very convenient with regard to the export of cryptographic
technology to Third World countries, since it enabled the BND to implant
‘Trojan Horses’ inside the exported technology. The BND was able to read
encrypted radio transmissions from Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Japan,
Malaysia, India, Nigeria, and Israel because the cryptographic technology
exported by Germany to these countries had an inherent technical weakness.
At Pullach, the decrypts based on this technology were called ‘Yellow
Stroke Reports’. Insofar as which countries were monitored most intensely,
priority was given to the Middle East and North Africa, with Egypt, Iraq,
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              161
Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Pakistan, Sudan, Syria, and Tunisia
getting most of the attention.111
    Because of information contained in one of these ‘Yellow Stroke
Reports’, the BND knew, for instance, that in late November or early
December 1975 there had been a meeting of Iranian, Saudi Arabian and
Egyptian intelligence officers in Cairo.112 In June 1976, the Pullach
eavesdroppers also intercepted a radio message from the Iranian
intelligence chief of station in Cairo to his headquarters in Tehran about an
impending visit of a BND delegation to the Egyptian capital.113
    NATO partners, such as Italy, Spain and Turkey, were not exempted
from these ‘Yellow Stroke Reports’. What General Gehlen had started
during the Cold War regarding surveillance of Western countries was
continued by his successors. In July 1973, the BND noted a substantial
decrease in the number of ‘Begonie-Narzisse Yellow Stroke Reports’,
which meant that Denmark (‘Begonie’) and France (‘Narzisse’) had
improved the security of their cryptographic systems. The Vice President of
the BND quickly ordered an inquiry to determine the reasons for this
decline.114 The results of this inquiry are unknown at present.
    It should be noted that the German listening post at Monschau-Höven
outside Bonn was used primarily by the BND to eavesdrop on the telegraph
and radio traffic of all important embassies in Bonn.115 After the German
government’s relocation to Berlin in the summer of 1999, another listening
post in Germany assumed this function.116
    Despite the above-mentioned setback, the professionalism of German
cryptanalysts and cipher experts was an important reason why the BND
had a good reputation with its foreign intelligence partners. For instance,
it led in April 1973 to the ‘exchange of coded raw material with
“Hockey”’,117 which was the codename for Britain’s GCHQ. But the ZfCh
experts did the British Sigint service its greatest favor in 1982 when they
were one of the several NATO intelligence services that could read the
encrypted radio traffic between Buenos Aires and the Argentinian military
on the Falklands Islands (the Argentinians referred to them as the
Malvinas) during the Falklands War.118 They did this thanks to a code key
that the Abwehr had captured from the French during World War II. The
cipher, still in use in Argentinia in the 1980s, had this way come to
Gehlen.
    The BND also expanded its communications intelligence (Comint)
interests in Africa. A strategically important Sigint system called
‘Advookat’ was shipped to the Republic of South Africa by way of the
German electronics firm AEG Telefunken, and began operations at the
South African Simonstown listening post in 1975. In September 1977, a
ZfCh staff member named Mr Rave suggested to BND management that
162     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

specialists from his bureau should be sent to South Africa. The RSA partner
service, which was known within the BND by the covername ‘Panther’, had
already received eight decoding programs from the BND, but it appeared
that Pretoria’s intelligence personnel were not able to effectively use these
software programs. Pullach recognized how politically explosive such
support for the South African apartheid regime was since this nation was
covered by a UN embargo.119 Nonetheless, the South Africans received
highly sensitive technological materials and logistics support from
Germany. According to Gert Hugo, who was until 1991 the director of
Ciskei’s security service, in 1984 the BND gave South African agents three-
month training courses in electronic surveillance skills.120
    On 17 December 1990, the Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der
Informationstechnik (Federal Bureau for Security in Information
Technology, BSI) was established, which grew out of the BND’s ZfCh.
Initially, its headquarters was attached to the BND in 1989, and renamed it
the Zentralstelle für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (Central Office
for Security in Information Technology). Later, it became a federal bureau
with a staff of about 300 personnel, and was placed under control of the
German Ministry of Internal Affairs. Critics believed right from the start
that the formation of the BSI was an attempt by the German government to
create a mini NSA.121
    The first director of the Central Office and of the BSI was Otto
Leiberich, who had worked for the BND since 1957. In 1962, he was
promoted to the position of top mathematician at the BND, and served as
the director of the ZfCh until its closure in 1989. The transcripts of a secret
German Parliament (Bundestag) budget committee meeting detailed the
alliance between the BND and the BSI. In the documents, the Director of
the BND’s Department 2 (Telecommunications Reconnaissance) explained
to the president of the Federal Auditor General’s office why in 1994 the BSI
wanted a mainframe computer costing several million DM for use in
cryptanalysis. However, nothing changed which meant that the BSI only
officially had the responsibility for decoding. In reality the BND had the
decisive influence on the BSI and apparently the BND has retained the
responsibility for cryptanalysis. In the 1998 organization chart for the
downsized BND, the Agency’s Department 2 (Telecommunications
Reconnaissance) is once again responsible for ‘deciphering’. The BND has
been able to maintain its cryptanalytic proficiency with the help of
American-made supercomputers, and it currently can solve the cipher
systems of many nations, except Japanese and Italian ciphers.122
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                               163
L E G A L FOUNDATIONS

The worldwide bugging of embassies and eavesdropping on diplomatic
personnel is the type of special ‘hospitality’ that intelligence services give
to the representatives of other nations. For example, the BND reported in
 1973 that ten microphones had been discovered in the German embassy in
Warsaw.123 This was twice as many as had been discovered the previous
year. By the end of the 1950s, the BND itself had already carried out
eavesdropping operations directed against the Soviet trade mission in Bonn
and apartments occupied by Russian diplomatic personnel in the greater
Cologne-Bonn area. The BND also had set its sights on bugging the offices
of the Chinese news agency Hsin-Hua in Bad Godesberg.
    Faced with moral qualms about his duties, in 1963 an employee of the
Federal Office for the Protection of Constitutional Rights (BfV), Werner
Pätsch, publicly revealed some illegal joint ventures that the BfV and
engaged in with several allied intelligence services. In the course of this
affair, it became quite clear that the Allied victors of World War II, with no
legal barriers to stop them, had engaged in the wholesale invasion of the
privacy of German citizens by tapping telephones and reading personal
mail. These powers were replaced on 13 August 1968 by the State of
Emergency Law, or the G-10 Act. Under this act, the BND now assumed the
responsibility for postal and telecommunications control in order to combat
threats to the constitution, the security of the Federal Republic of Germany,
and allied troops stationed on German soil.
    In the summer of 1971, the jurisdiction to exercise these powers was
transferred from the BND to the German chancellery in Bonn.124 With the
permission of the German Parliament’s G-10 commission, the BND has the
powers to monitor cable communications nets also in order to assist the
other German intelligence and security services. The BND must always
possess the most advanced technology to perform this task as, for instance,
happened in February 1974, Blötz asked the chief of Department II what
operations had to be executed in order to get access to new, high-frequency
lines.125
    In early 1975, the BND conducted Operation ‘Flattermann’, a G-10-
sanctioned eavesdropping operation against the East German chief of
protocol Günther Marsch, who was stationed in Bonn. The operation was
conducted because the BND was interested in Marsch’s activities against
foreign diplomats stationed in Bonn. While Marsch talked on the telephone
with ‘models’ and prostitutes, he asked if he could bring photographic paper
with him on his ‘dates’. Surveillance confirmed that despite his many dates,
he never had any sex with the ladies of the world’s oldest profession. Since
this surveillance operation produced no information of intelligence value, in
164     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

early 1975 the chief of chancellery discretely told East German Secretary of
State Günther Vogel about Marsch’s subversive activities.126
    The case of nuclear scientist Klaus Traube is among the greatest secret
service scandals in Germany. This occurred in 1975 during an illegal
wiretapping of the telephone of a supposed terrorist sympathizer by the BfV.
It eventually led to the dismissal of the Minister for Internal Affairs, Werner
Maihofer. The BND only provided technical assistance to the operation,
which it routinely did during eavesdropping operations for the military
security service (MAD) and the BfV. The BND also provided technical and
manpower support to the federal and provincial criminal bureaus for their
eavesdropping operations.127
    For example, in February 1974 BND President Gerhard Wessel gave
permission for the BND to provide assistance to the Provincial Criminal
Bureau (LKA) of Bavaria for an eavesdropping operation against Baader-
Meinhof Group sympathizers. As a precaution, he ordered that the BND
officers assigned to the operation were to be posted or seconded to the LKA
office in Munich for the duration of the operation.128 However, not only
terrorists were targets of the BND: critical journalists were too. In
November 1976, some Cologne Bild newspaper employees of the BND
cadre have, according to the affected author, even provided ‘agency
assistance’ while eavesdropping on Günter Wallraff.129

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

The new Anti-Criminal Activities Act passed the joint parliamentary
committee of both the Bundestag and the Bundesrat in the summer of 1994,
and subsequently became law on 12 September 1994. The Green Party (Die
Grünen) and former Communist Party (PDS) voted against the Act in the
Bundestag. The Bundestag’s Federal Commissioner for Data Protection
explicitly warned in a public hearing on 11 April 1994 about the citizens’
loss of personal freedoms and liberties through the inclusion of the
intelligence services in anti-criminal activities. He stated that 4,000
conversations a day, or about 1.5 million conversations a year would be
monitored pursuant to this Act. He recommended an ‘authoritative
instruction of the parliament and the public about the BND’s endeavors and
also how well the individual rights of the affected people were safeguarded,
and whether the new means justified the final results’.
    The aim of this act was to equip the BND for its new tasks of monitoring
international terrorism, weapons and technology transfer, illegal drug
trafficking, and cross-border counterfeiting and money laundering, as well
as to facilitate the control of non-cable carried telecommunications. It also
allowed the BND to execute where appropriate direct telephone monitoring
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              165
and eavesdropping operations at the request of the Ministry for Internal
Affairs and the G-10 Commission of the Bundestag.130
    In July 1995, the Federal Constitutional Court issued a provisional
directive which overturned a large part of the new enforcement rights. In
July 1999, the highest German court declared parts of the anti-criminal
activities legislation unconstitutional. Not surprisingly, the BND was not
happy with this verdict. On 1 March 1996, the BND officially began its
strategic monitoring campaign, and as of 1998 was using a computerized
watch list containing 6,979 G-10 commission-authorized individual names,
key terms, and telephone numbers. However, the BND stated that it was the
limitations imposed by the Federal Constitutional Court which was
responsible for the campaign’s colossal failure in combating organized
crime.131
    In the two and a half years since March 1996, 4,600 hits on proliferation
and about 6,000 on weapons trade were evaluated. In the same period
international terrorism and war on drugs scored 100 each, resulting in the
deactivation of the related keywords.132 In the keyword database of the BND
in 1998, 500 search subjects in relation with terrorism, 2,000 related to
proliferation and 400 to the war on drugs were activated. On 23 December
1996, the President of the BND, Hans Jörg Geiger, presented in Karlsruhe
the ‘Report on the Implementation of Strategic Control Measures according
to Article 1, Paragraph 3 of the G-10 Act’. The report found it inappropriate
‘to question the purpose of the strategic control measures due to the small
number of the provided reports’. The BND declared in its comments to the
Constitutional Court that it had a daily limit of 15,000 communications
being monitored because of limited capacity. Of this amount, after sorting
and selecting by machines and evaluation by human operators, only five
daily eavesdropping reports were analyzed.133 But outside experts believe
that that the BND is hiding a great deal about its monitoring operations.
    With fax and telex messages, it is possible using existing technology to
determine the identity of both the sender and receiver of a message.
However, when it comes to telephone conversations, only one side of the
conversation, the so-called ‘down-link’ portion, can be intercepted by the
BND’s eavesdroppers. The BND has stated that: ‘of an oral satellite
conversation, say between Europe and Asia, the BND can only monitor that
part that is emitted by the Asian subscriber and then transmitted to Europe
by satellite. Now, using this example, the corresponding remarks of the
European subscriber cannot be recorded by the BND due to technological-
physical reasons.’ However, this is only partly true because Pullach also
operates Satcom intercept joint ventures with Taiwan, as well as with the
French at Kourou in French Guyana and New Caledonia, which
theoretically can pick up the other end of the telephone conversation.
166     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

THE F U T U R E OF SIGINT IN G E R M A N Y

After World War II Reinhard Gehlen immediately put much effort in
gaining a monopoly position for him and his organization in the intelligence
service community. In 1947 he pushed aside his rival at the US intelligence
 services community, Herman Baun,134 and was successful with his intrigue
resulting in the downfall of the secret service of the ‘Amtes Blank’
(forerunner of the Ministry of Defence), the ‘Friedrich-Wilhelm-Heinz-
Dienst’ by Adenauer’s Minister of State Hans Globke.135 He controlled, by
means of his trustee Josef Selmayr, the foundation of the military counter
espionage service in 1957 and took over from Wilhelm Flicke the American
financed Sigint centre in Lauf. Until the mid-1950s, numerous attempts
were made for an all-embracing West German security apparatus. In 1955,
Franz Josef Strauss, at that time Federal Minister for Special Assignments,
urged Globke to establish a state security service and two years later the
CDU faction in the Bundestag deliberated upon a constitutional bases for
the Organisation Gehlen.136
    Beside this Gehlen, supported by Strauss, always hoped to become
director of such a department enabling him to achieve the status of state
minister. Even when this goal became unattainable, the BND was able to
obtain a unique position in the field of Humint, including the tasking of the
military attachés, and to create a dominating Sigint position over the
Bundeswehr. A position that was strengthened by the internal competition
within the armed forces between the Army, Navy and Air Force. In April
1971, the Vice President of the BND Blötz even tried to ‘hand over to the
BND the joint signal intelligence activities in the BMVg region (with
conscripts) for which an arrangement should be made how to detach a
communication intelligence section under the BMVg in case of
employment’.137 In that time the functional hierarchy of the BND in
wartime, during which the staff should be withdrawn to Spain, was not yet
clear.138
    On 5 May 1971 the direction of Department II of the
Bundesnachrichtendienst again deliberated about the question: ‘Is it
possible that the BND takes over the joint signal intelligence gathering of
the Bundeswehr?’139 These points of view should result in a cabinet
decision, but were eventually rejected on juridical grounds.140 The
foundation of the intelligence service of the Bundeswehr (ANBw) by
Defense Minister Hans Apel in June 1978, was only a half-hearted attempt
to ensure the Bundeswehr, which for territorial defense focused on the East,
had its own and independent Comint capability. At the time the intention to
recruit military communication intelligence experts from the BND
remained an empty threat.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                              167
    Due to the agreement between the BND and the Bundeswehr, the first in
1958, followed by the Zugvogel treaty of October 1969 and finally under
BND President Konrad Porzner in 1992, Pullach could repeatedly
strengthen its dominating position in the field of Sigint. This offered the
BND, apart from a huge amount of exclusive information, also numerous
other advantages. Possessing the monopoly of exchanging information with
NATO members and all other third parties, the service was able to benefit
from the large amounts of Sigint material in the exchange with small
intelligence services.
    Besides this the BND also received support from the German industry
because the service was able to promote the export of technical intelligence
material in more than 100 countries.141 And last but not least the weak BND
spots in the field of Humint could be compensated because during the
process of analysis, agent reports, open source information and useable
Sigint material could be mixed unnoticed. Because there was no competing
organization in West Germany, an objective review of the information and
its source was denied to the politicians. At the most reports sent by the
diplomats of the foreign ministry contained expanded facts and
assessments.
    However, in the spring of 1999 Chancellor Gerhard Schröder installed a
committee chaired by the former Bundespresident Richard von Weizäcker
that presented proposals for a reform of the Bundeswehr on 23 May 2000.
Already its terms of reference: ‘to discern timely the development of crisis
and in order to be able to take decisions, the Bundeswehr has a requirement
for an independent and unfiltered access to current and comprehensive
information’,142 indicates a declaration of war against the US monopoly and
against the Bundesnachrichtendienst.
    Parallel to this Defense Minister Rudolf Scharping also ordered the
development of proposals for the future structure of the armed forces. In
many sectors competitive institutes produced various proposals, however
there was unanimity about the new orientation on strategic intelligence. The
Minister of Defense said that the Bundeswehr should ‘contribute to the early
detection of crises by using their own resources as well as by cooperating
with allies and ensure full information is furnished to the political and
military leaders at all times’. And in the Priorities he wrote: ‘The
Bundeswehr will acquire a spaceborne reconnaissance capability of its own
to improve Germany’s capacity to assess political and military situations
and to supplement Alliance capabilities.’143
    A serious threat for the old Sigint-monopoly of the BND is formed by
the concrete transposition of this preamble in the authorized ‘instruction of
the Inspector-General of the Bundeswehr for the planning of the armed
forces in the future’ dated July 2000. ‘Capabilities lacked so far - such as
168     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the capability of strategic deployment and strategic intelligence as well as
an improvement of the inter-operability and performance of the control
systems and -equipment becomes prominent.’144 The preamble to take into
account ‘the common aspect of the armed forces ... particularly in the field
of command, intelligence collection and reconnaissance’ eliminates the
present competition between the elements of the armed forces and therefore
creates a good starting point for the battle about how to divide the
responsibilities with the BND. Besides this the Inspector-General demands
‘priority for facilities to improve the control capability emphasizing
strategic reconnaissance, operational/tactical reconnaissance and
superiority in the field of information’.
    In the years to come this priority will have its effects in a technical
modernization of intelligence tools, or in the words of the Weizäcker
commission ‘In the field of collecting intelligence and reconnaissance, new
capabilities should be acquired for satellite supported reconnaissance and
broad scale airborne regional reconnaissance, both imagery and Sigint.’ It is
not to be expected that the Bundeswehr will finance the expensive satellite
capability and airborne intelligence reconnaissance assets and then hand
over the responsibility to the BND in case of an operational deployment.145
According to the plans of the Inspector-General, the communication
elements for electronic warfare, the stationery and mobile communication,
and Elint units of the Army and the Navy, the Army telecommunication in
Germany as well as the mobile long-distance communication units not
subordinated to the operational troops and facilities and elements of
Communication Sector 70 of the Air Force in Trier will be united. The
emancipation of the Bundeswehr from the BND reaches the top in the
establishment of a Strategic Reconnaissance Command under control of the
Joint Support Command.
    At the future disposal of this reconnaissance holding of the Bundeswehr
are the following elements: stationary HF communication interception,
satellite interception (downlinks), interception of troop-, aircraft- and ray
transmitter communication mainly by mobile elements, electronic
interception from mobile platforms and weapon systems, airborne Sigint
collection by Breguet Atlantic aircraft, seaborne interception with the
present three survey vessels as well as with ‘optronical’ and radar data from
AWACS aircraft (NATO Airborne Early Warning Forces).
    The ANBw with its 620 employees was ‘a customer of intelligence
rather than a producer’. However, with the new intelligence center an
effective supply service, based on many pillars is growing. The gathering of
these information sources in one hand provides a much more differentiated
picture than the BND and the often-uncoordinated efforts of the ‘old’
Bundeswehr could ever produce.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                  169

    With large steps, the Inspector-General marches towards the fast
transition, for the set-up and the reconstruction of ‘all elements and facilities
of the military intelligence service into the structure of the armed forces’,
which will, in chronological order, take place on 1 October 2001. Already
in the summer of 2000, certain working groups within the ANBw, were
already active. In the 1990s, the Bundeswehr already did its independent
reconnaissance ‘run on trial’ in a potential deployment area, during the
crises and war in the Balkan region. Already during the separation wars in
Yugoslavia and lately in the Kosovo war, the Bundeswehr had carried out
electronic interceptions independent from the BND using its direction
finders and interception stations (reaching up to the Urals) in Germany. The
ANBw was very satisfied with the results.146
    Parallel to the concentration of interception facilities, the Ministry of
Defense at the same time procures an analytical braintrust by uniting
elements so far linked to various authorities. The scientific capacities of the
Federal Academy of Security Policy in Strauszberg and of the universities
of the Bundeswehr in Hamburg and Munich, the reports from the German
military representative with the military committee of NATO and with the
WEU will fall under the Inspector of the Armed Forces. He also takes direct
operational command over the new intelligence center of the Bundeswehr
in Bad Neuenahr-Ahrweiler and over the military counter-espionage service
(MAD) in Köln as well as over the Amt für Militärkunde, that is, the military
part of the BND. The proposals of the Bundeswehr are aimed at the
withdrawal of the BND from the entire collection of military intelligence.
They are therefore dynamite for Pullach, which in 1998 applied for 70
million DM147 for the purchase and maintenance of technical equipment for
its 10 interception stations in Germany and has to battle more budgetary
cutbacks.
    In May 1992, the French SR (Service des Renseignement Militaire) was
restructured by General Jean Heinrich and became the DRM (Direction du
Renseignement Militaire, 650 military personnel), obtaining monopoly for
military communication intelligence including the satellite branch. The
expertise was withdrawn from the French counterpart of the BND, the
DGSE.148
    Still such a step in Germany is not yet likely to take place but the trend
goes in that direction. For example, the Weizäcker commission already
ordered for intelligence ‘the joint purchase and a cooperation of
partners...originally collected information should be available for all
partners’.149 Herewith a judgement is passed over the old monopoly of the
BND for the exchange of intelligence material not only with NATO
partners. The conflict of authority between the BND and the Bundeswehr is
pre-programmed when in case of an international deployment the
170     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Bundeswehr cooperates with non-NATO members and consequently shares
intelligence without using a long route via Pullach. In case of close allies
outside NATO such as Israel and Japan, one could envisage that the
Bundeswehr, looking for future beneficial talents, cooperates with the
military intelligence services involved.
    Another source of conflict lies in the limitation of the definition military
intelligence. For the Bundeswehr, the defense policy, the defense economy
and other political areas defining the endurance of an enemy state in times
of war, are areas of interest. The fact that in the BND the military and
defence policy sector becomes secondary means a severe detraction of its
position within the political structure of Germany.
    In the so-called new area of interest of the BND, in the field of the war
against organized crime, the service has not achieved the intended success
so far. Under pressure of developing priorities in the face of financial
cutbacks, the BND already partially withdrew from these sectors. As soon
as the Bundeswehr has postured itself in the new intelligence- and
exploitation priorities, Pullach has to focus on political intelligence,
international terrorism, arms trade and proliferation as well as on economic
intelligence, including industrial espionage against foreign enterprises. It is
doubtful that the civil foreign intelligence service will achieve in these
difficult sectors such a wide acceptance, as the Bundeswehr will on its most
peculiar terrain.
    However, the main part of the new independence of the Bundeswehr will
be the responsibility for the evaluation process in which also requirements
for communication intelligence will be taken over. This will automatically
exceed the restriction to Sigint. Apart from the knowledge derived from all
own intelligence sources, the Bundeswehr has set eyes on the use of raw
material (Sigint, Radint, Masint, etc.) of counterparts, on the presence on
the Internet and information networks of target organizations, on
intelligence collection by Humint with military attachés as well as with
deployed elements of the Bundeswehr and of industrial enterprises, as well
as on the evaluation of open sources such as specialized literature, scientific
studies, etc. ‘However, an improvement of the professional analysis and
evaluation of the available information is necessary.’ The Weizäcker
commission concluded that ‘the required evaluation expertise for this must
be bundled and extended’.150
    The commission recommends strengthening the national capacity for
analyzing and evaluating received information by parceling and quality
improvement of the available agencies (BND, the military intelligence
service and intelligence services of the armed forces elements) and wants to
facilitate the newly created organization in the vicinity of Berlin.151 In an
explanation it was stated that the present capabilities are divided up, that the
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                 171
Bundeswehr suffers from poor coordination and that the official lanes are
long and winding. It is true that the BND in 2001 will move its intelligence
processing unit of about 1,000 employees to Berlin in order to be closer to
its clients, but certainly not to let them merge into a new analysis
organization independent from Pulach. In future, the Bundeswehr will be
able to play the key role in an area overlapping the evaluation process. It is
not yet clear which department will take the responsibility here. Leaving the
responsibility to the BMVg would politically be too ticklish.
    Already in 1993, this author suggested transferring all Sigint activities to
the armed forces, to assign the war against the organized crime to the
Bundeskriminalambt exclusively, to bring the integrated intelligence
analysis under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to limit the BND to
Humint.152 However, because in a coalition government, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs traditionally is assigned to the smaller coalition partner, the
placing of such a braintrust under the department of the Bundeskanzler, that
traditionally patronizes foreign affairs, is more probable.
    At the end of this development, automatically the need for a coordination
commission on a political level, for instance in the committee of the
Secretary of State in the Federal security counsel will grow. Besides direct
cooperation with the BND and the Bundeswehr, this commission will take
care of the production of intelligence requirements from the top. These
requirements will bring together and review information from various
sources. Eventually this will lead to a quality control of the various
intelligence services. However, because the ANBw is not controlled by the
PKK (Parliamentary Control Commission), it does report to the Bundestag
Defense Committee (Verteidigungsausschuss).153
    The armed forces show little tendency to submit their apparatus,
emerging into a regular intelligence service, to the parliamentary control of
the PKK. Looking at the new capabilities for intelligence collection by
secret services, including the use of satellites, the involvement of Humint in
the intelligence process and because of their appearance on the international
stage, the same parliamentary control for the BND and the
Verfassungsschutz should be required here for the sake of the democratic
principle. But neither in the center of power in the red-green government,
nor within the opposition is there a majority for such a solution.
172      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                          NOTES

 1. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, ‘Empfänglich für Geheimes’, in Klaus Beyrer (ed.)
    Streng Geheim. Die Welt der verschlüsselten Kommunikation (Heidelberg: Umschau
     1999).
 2. Hermann Zolling and Heinz Höhne, Pullach intern (Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe
     1970) Chapters 5–10. For the CIA connection: Mary Ellen Reese, General Reinhard
    Gehlen: The CIA-Connection (Fairfax, VA: George Mason UP 1990).
 3. Zolling and Höhne (note 2) pp.l24ff. and 197.
 4. Georg Meyer, ‘General Adolf Heusinger und die Organisation Gehlen’, in Wolfgang
    Krieger and Jürgen Weber (ed.) Spionage für den Frieden? Nachrichtendienste in
    Deutschland während des Kalten Krieges (München: Olzog 1997) pp.225–46.
 5. For the decisive influence the OG had on Germany’s rearmament see Erich Schmidt-
    Eenboom, ‘Der innenpolitische Einfluß des BND’, in Hans-Jürgen Lange (ed.) Staat,
    Demokratie und Innere Sicherheit in Deutschland (Opladen: Leske & Budrich 2000)
    p.l87ff.
 6. A former officer of the Wehrmacht, who had worked since 1950 at the OG Sigint center at
    Butzbach, claimed that this study was not done by General Heusinger, but rather by another
    former Wehrmacht intelligence officer named Wilhelm Flicke.
 7. Source: Amt Blank, Military Section, File Heusinger, Federal archives-military archives
    BW 9/3574, pp.26–39.
 8. D. Urwin, Western Europe since 1945 (London: Longman 1990) pp.110–19 and 126–35.
 9. Zolling and Höhne Pullach (note 2) p.110, using the diary of H. Baun.
10. According to one former officer of the Wehrmacht’s espionage service who used to operate
    out of Finland. He declined the offer and choose a career as an architect. Confidential
    interview, Feb. 1986.
11. Rudolf Grabau, Ideen und Planungen für eine militärische Funkaufklärung in
    Westdeutschland nach Ende des 2. Weltkriegs (Much: private study 1999) p.3.
12. Biographical information on the members of German Sigint are in the National Archives,
    NARA 3452.
13. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase. Der BND (Düsseldorf: Econ 1993) p.223.
14. Grabau, Ideen und Planungem (note 11) p.6.
15. Ref. surveillance areas of the military listening post Lauf, Confidential, document held at
    the Fernmeldemuseum of the Bundeswehr in Feldafing.
16. Within the framework of this contribution, it is not possible to clearly define the
    telecommunications branch of the Bundesgrenzschutz and the customs criminal branch
    (ZKA). In 1991, the ZKA in Cologne obtained a surveillance mandate under the Eighth Act
    for the Amendment of the Foreign Trade Law and became the fourth intelligence service
    at federal level. The mandate includes mail and telecommunications control.
17. Ref. draft of the federal budget for the financial year 1957, separate plan 04, chapter 04 in
    the Federal Archives at Koblenz, reference Bundeskanzleramt B 136/4885.
18. For 1976 letter Blötz to General Wust, 12/03/76, Secret. For 1997: Udo Ulfkotte,
    Verschlußsache BND (München: Koehler & Amelang 1997) p.116. Although Ulfkotte pays
    attention to Sigint in his book, he hardly deals with the Sigint activities of the BND. Also
    in other German publications Sigint is playing a marginal role and is hardly mentioned. A
    book solely dealing with the BND and Sigint is missing.
19. Grabau, Ideen und Planungen (note 11) p.33.
20. The history of the army’s telecommunications units is presented in detail by Rudolf
    Grabau, The Army’s Telecommunications Corps, Volumes 1–4 (Bonn: Fernmeldering e.V.
    1995–99) passim.
21. For the Sigint of German Air Force in detail Rudolf Grabau, Der Neubeginn der FmEloAufkl
    und der Eloka der Luftwaffe ab 1956 und das dem Neuaufbau zugrundeliegende Konzept
    (Much: private study 2000) passim.
22. Franz Josef Strauss, Die Erinnerungen (Berlin: Siedler 1989) p.358.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                              173
23. Grabau(note ll)p.34f.
24. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, Undercover (Cologne: Kiepenheuer & Witsch 1999) p.l56f.
25. BND, Grundlegende der ‘Bundesstelle für Fernmeldestatistik’, Stand vom 1 Aug. 1970, 4
    pages.
26. Blötz memo, Secret, 2 Oct. 1990, p.1.
27. Blötz note of a discussion with BND president Wessel, Secret, 27 Jan. 1971, p.1.
28. Letter Blötz to the Chief of Department II, Secret, 25 April 1972, p.2.
29. Blötz note of a discussion with Wessel, Secret, 1 Sept. 1971, p.1.
30. Letter Blötz to the Chief of Department II, Secret, 25 April 1972, p.1.
31. Blötz note, Secret, 14 Feb. 1975.
32. Letter Blötz to Arthur Stimson (CIA), Secret, 5 April 1974, p.2.
33. Letter Blötz to General Wust, 12 March 1976, p.2.
34. Blötz note, Secret, 18 Dec. 1974, p.3.
35. Letter Blötz to General Dr Schnell, Secret, 30 Jan 1975, p.1.
36. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1976, and letter Blötz to Buffham, Secret, 22 Oct. 1976, Item 4.
37. Letter Blötz to General Dr Schnell, Secret, 8 Sept. 1975.
38. Agreement between Blötz and General Wust, Secret, BND document 125/1976.
39. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1975, p.5.
40. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.236.
41. Schmidt-Eenboom, Empfänglich für Geheimes (note 1) p. 164.
42. Ibid. p.165.
43. Private information from the secret Bundeswehr building programs 1991.
44. Schmidt-Eenboom, Empfänglich für Geheimes (note 1) p.165.
45. Private information by an involved Bundeswehr officer.
46. Blötz note of a discussion with deputy minister Wilhelm Berkhan, ministry of defense,
    Secret, 4 July 1972, p.3.
47. Blötz note, 29 Aug. 1973 of a discussion with Schnell on 28 Aug. 1973, p.7f.
48. Letter Blötz to Schnell, Secret, 21 Jan. 1974.
49. Memo Blötz, Secret, 12 Nov. 1974.
50. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1976.
51. Schmidt-Eenboom, ‘Empfänglich für Geheimes’ (note 1) p.167; After Gablingen was
    closed early in the 1990s the liaison staff went to Bad Aibling.
52. Blötz note, Secret, 12 Nov. 1974, p.1.
53. Blötz note, Top Secret, 16 Jan. 1975, p.2.
54. Letter Blötz to Burrough, 4 June 1975.
55. Letter Blötz to Buffham, Secret, 22 Oct. 1976, Item 6.
56. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1976.
57. Blötz note, Secret, 14 Dec. 1976, p.4.
58. Blötz note, Secret, 24 Jan. 1978, p.7.
59. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.224.
60. Private information from an employee of German Telekom, 1999.
61. Jeffrey T. Richelson and Desmond Ball, The Ties that Bind: Intelligence Cooperation
    Between the UKUSA Countries (London: Allen & Unwin 1990) pp.170–1.
62. This happened after in 1991 the Naval Security Group and the 6913th Electronic
    Security Squadron and in 1993 the 701st Inscom’s Military Intelligence Brigade were
    deactivated.
63. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.226.
64. IWR Daily Update, Vol. 7, No. 137, 21-07-2000 quoting Washington Post, 24 July
    2000.
65. Der Spiegel, No. 47/1999, p.32f.
66. Private information by a BND employee, Dec. 1999.
67. Letter Blötz to Karl Liedtke, member of parliament from Bochum, 11 Feb. 1974.
68. Blötz note, Top Secret, 16 Jan. 1975, p.1.
69. Letter Blötz to Dr Louis Tordella, 22 July 1974.
174       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

 70. Blötz note, Secret, 22 Oct. 1976.
 71. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.270.
 72. Blötz note, Secret, 5 May 1971, p.3.
 73. Blötz note of a discussion with Wessel, Secret, 13 Oct. 1970, p.9f.
 74. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1976.
 75. Letter Blötz to General Wust, Secret, 6 Feb. 1976, p.2.
 76. Blötz note, Confidential, 20 Aug. 1976, p.4.
 77. Agenda of the BND as regards the visit of the parliamentary control commission on 12
      April 1989.
 78. In detail Bernd W. Kubbig and Tillmann Elliesen, Wozu sollen die europäischen Satelliten
      Helios II und Horus dienen?, Hessische Stiftung für Friedens- und Konfliktforschung,
      HSFK-Report 3/1997 (Frankfurt 1997) passim.
 79. Private information from a former BND officer, 1996.
 80. Juegen Saupe and Frank P. Heigl, Operation EVA (Hamburg: Konkret 1982) p.114.
 81. BND, ND-Begriffsbestimmungen (Pullach 1974).
 82. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.222f.
 83. Confidential interview with a former officer of the Ministry for State Security of the GDR,
      1994.
 84. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) pp.l37f., 179 and 270.
 85. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, Der Schattenkrieger. Klaus Kinkel und der BND (Düsseldorf:
      Econ 1995)p.l08ff.
 86. Juergen Roth, Die Mitternachtsregierung (Hamburg: Rasch und Röhring 1990) Chapter 5
      and private information from an interview with a former GDR military attaché in Maputo,
      1992.
 87. Schmidt-Eenboom, Der Schattenkrieger (note 85) p.53.
 88. Strauss, Die Erinnerungen (note 22) p.358.
 89. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom and Jo Angerer, Die schmutzigen Geschäfte der Wirtschafts¬
      spione (Düsseldorf: Econ 1994) p.97.
 90. Private information from an interview with a former MAD officer.
 91. Schmidt-Eenboom, Empfänglich für Geheimes (note 41) p.180 and also Jean Guisnel in the
      weekly news magazine Le Point, 6 June 1998.
 92. Private information from a wife of an involved BND officer.
 93. Schmidt-Eenboom, Der Schattenkrieger (note 85) p.28.
 94. Note Blötz of discussions with Wessel, Secret, 26 March 1971, p.3 and Secret, 16 April
      1971, p.7f.
 95. Blötz note, Secret, 5 March 1975, p.5 and p.8.
 96. Blötz note, Secret, 16 July 1975, p.3.
 96a. Blötz note, Secret, 8 Oct. 1975, p.6.
 97. Blötz note, Secret, 11 Dec. 1978, p.2.
 98. Blötz note of a discussion with BND president Wessel, Secret, 15 Feb. 1974, p.7.
 99. Telephone call with a Afghan WAD captain in summer 1996 then living in Tadjikistan.
100. ‘BND soll Russland unterstützt haben’, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 8 April 2000; ‘Aus Feinden
      werden Freunde’, ibid., 10 April 2000 and ‘Deutschland und der Islamismus im Kaukasus’,
      Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 10 May 2000.
101. ‘Geheimdienst befürchtet Ausweitung des Krieges in Tschetschenien’, Berliner Zeitung, 17
      April 2000.
102. Der Spiegel, No. 24/1992, p.16.
103. Schmidt-Eenboom, Der Schattenkrieger (note 85) p.36.
104. Bob Woodward, VEIL. The Secret Wars of the CIA 1981–1987 (London: Headline Book
      Publishing 1988) p.314.
105. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.274.
106. Blötz note, Secret, 29 Oct. 1975, p.1.
107. Blötz note, 10 Sept. 1975; note, 29 Oct. 1975, note, 16 Oct. 1975, note, 17 Nov. 1975, all
      Secret.
THE BUNDESNACHRICHTENDIENST                                                              175
108. Blötz note, Secret, 24 Jan. 1978, p.2.
109. Letter Blötz to General Dr Schnell, 1 April 1975.
110. For the first years of cryptography in the Federal Republic of Germany: Michael von der
     Meulen, ‘Cryptology in the Early Bundesrepublik’, Cryptologia (July 1996).
111. Schmidt-Eenboom, Der Schattenkrieger (note 85) p.68.
112. Blötz note, Secret, 15 Oct. 1975, p.3.
113. Blötz note, Secret, 10 June 1976, p.5.
114. Blötz note of a discussion with Wessel, Secret, 19 July 1973, p.6.
115. Der Spiegel 52/1998, ‘Auf einem Ohr blind’, p.33.
116. Private information from a former BND employee, 1999.
117. Note Blötz, Secret, 23 May 1973.
118. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.246; Dutch Editor’s note: also the
     Dutch Sigint service could read this traffic and forwarded it to GCHQ. See the contribution
     on Holland by Wiebes.
119. Blötz note, Secret, 7 Sept. 1977, p.1.
120. Freitag (German weekly newspaper), 18 Sept. 1992.
121. Schmidt-Eenboom and Angerer (note 89) p.224f.
122. Der Spiegel 52/1998, ‘Auf einem Ohr blind’, p.33.
123. Blötz note, Secret, 9 July 1973, p.2.
124. Blötz note, Secret, 22 April 1971, p.2.
125. Blötz note, Secret, 11 Feb. 1974.
126. Blötz note, Secret, 5 March 1975, p.3.
127. For the Traube case: Richard Meier, Geheimdienst ohne Maske (Bergisch-Gladbach: Lübbe
     1992)pp.l6–30.
128. Blötz note of a discussion with BND President Wessel, Secret, 15 Feb. 1974, p.5.
129. Schmidt-Eenboom, Undercover (note 24) p.82ff.
130. Karl-Ludwig Haedge, Das neue Nachrichtendienstrecht für die Bundesrepublik
     Deutschland (Heidelberg: Kriminalistik 1998) p.209ff.
131. Der Spiegel 52/1998, ‘Auf einem Ohr blind’, p.32f.
132. Frankfurter Rundschau, 7 Dec. 1998.
133. Bundesnachrichtendienst - The president, Report on the Implementation of Strategic
     Control Measures according to Article 1, Paragraph 3 of the G-10 Act, Pullach 23 Dec.
     1996.
134. Zolling and Höhne (note 2) p. 112.
135. Susanne Meinl, ‘Im Mahlstrom des Kalten Krieges’, in Krieger and Weber (note 4)
     pp.258–61.
136. Bodo Wegmann, ‘Vergleichende Untersuchung der Entstehung und Entwicklung geheimer
     Nachrichten- und Sicherheitsdienste in Deutschland-Ost und - West 1945 bis Ende der
     fünfziger Jahre’, Diplomarbeit Universität Berlin 1998, p.41.
137. Blötz note, Secret, 21 April 1971, p.3.
138. Blötz note, Secret, 28 April 1971.
139. BND II 1, Tagebuch Nr. 666/1971, Secret.
140. Confidential information from a former high ranking officer of the Bundeswehr.
141. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) p.270.
142. Gemeinsame Sicherheiz und Zukunft der Bundeswehr. Bericht der Kommission an die
     Bundesregierung, Berlin 22 May 2000, p.49, im folgenden Weizäcker-Kommission.
143. Ministry of Defense (ed.) The Bundeswehr - Advancing Steadily into the 21st Century,
     Cornerstones of a Fundamental Renewal (Berlin: MoD 2000) Nr.48.
144. Bundesministerium der Verteidigung - Generalinspekteur der Bundeswehr Fü S
     VI2, For official use only, July 2000, Weisung zur Ausplanung der Streitkräfte der Zukunft,
     p.10.
145. Weizäcker-Kommission (note 142) p.94.
146. Confidential interview with a Bundeswehr officer, July 2000.
147. Der Spiegel 52/1998, p.33.
176      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

148. Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, ‘Frankreich’, in idem (ed.), Nachrichtendienste in Nordamerika,
     Europa und Japan, CD-ROM (Weilheim: Stöppel 1995).
149. Weizäcker-Kommission (note 142) p.49.
150. Ibid.
151. Ibid. S.84.
152. Schmidt-Eenboom, Schnüffler ohne Nase (note 13) pp.446–53.
153. Shlomo Shpiro (ed.) Guarding the Guards - Parliamentary Control of the Intelligence
     Services in Germany and Britain (Sankt Augustin: Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung 1997) p.33.
                                      6
          France, Sigint and the Cold War

                         ROGER FALIGOT




Unlike the Anglo-Saxon signals intelligence community, the French Sigint
effort has never attracted much attention from historians. Is it because these
French ‘electronic warriors’ worked alone - for linguistic and political
reasons - and did not share as much information as typically took place
between the Sigint organisations of Britain, her former colonies (Canada,
Australia, New Zealand) and the US? Or is it because the official archives
on the subject are sealed in France? The answer is almost certainly - both.
    Despite these obstacles, it is possible to piece together much of the
French Sigint jigsaw puzzle thanks to open and private sources, as well as
from the recollections of the actors who participated in this secret war.
Taking part in this joint study with authors from many countries that
specialise in Sigint is a new and stimulating experience. It provides an
opportunity to present the French side of the story with a limited goal: to
open the door for others - scholars and historians - who will, no doubt,
perform a more exhaustive study of this subject in future.

THE EARLY YEARS OF FRENCH SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE
During World War I, the French performed their signals intelligence work
within the framework of the Allied cause against the Central Powers, led by
Imperial Germany. They capitalised on the inventions of French engineers
such as Edouard Branly, and the fact that the French had a long tradition of
cipher work dating back at least to the fourteenth century.
   At the beginning of the twentieth century, France possessed an excellent
team of cryptologists as well as some of the best radio intercept equipment
available, such as the radio intercept station located at the top of the 300
meter-high Eiffel Tower in Paris, which could copy radio transmissions
coming from thousands of kilometres away. In 1905, during the war in
178     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

which the Japanese Empire defeated Tsarist Russia, the French intercepted
the communications of the Japanese ambassador in Paris, Monoto Ichiro,
and the legendary French cryptologist Commandant Etienne Bazeries
deciphered them and passed their contents on to France’s Russian allies.
Despite this effort, the Japanese still won the war, thanks to their modern
wireless radio transmission system, which allowed them to concentrate their
naval forces and sink the Russian fleet at the Battle of Tsushima.1
    During World War I, French communications intelligence (Comint)
achieved impressive results during the fighting on the Western Front, which
are described more fully elsewhere.2 During 1914–18, the French operated
several radio intelligence centres, such as in Chartres and Bordeaux. But the
most important was the radio intercept station atop the Eiffel Tower in Paris,
which was connected to the Comint intercept and processing station at Le
Mont Valérien outside Paris, which was then the most important Sigint site
in France, and remained in service through the end of the twentieth century.
    The French also placed intercept stations throughout their overseas
empire. For example, there was an intercept station inside the French
Concession in Shanghai, which worked for the French foreign intelligence
service, the Service de Renseignement (SR). It played an important role
monitoring the activities of the Moscow-based Comintern (Communist
International) intelligence service in Asia, led by the former French
Communist leader Jean Cremet and the famous German spy Richard Sorge.
Both friends worked for the Red Army’s intelligence service, the GRU, and
operated a network of clandestine radio sets in Hong Kong, Macao and
Shanghai, which sent short wave messages to the Comintern’s Far Eastern
Bureau (FEB) at Vladivostok. This net also worked with the radio network
of the Chinese Communist Party, led by the special service chief and radio
technician Pan Hannian, which was under the technical supervision of the
Comintern International Liaison Office. The French and British security
services in Hanoi, Shanghai and Singapore were eager to intercept messages
and tried to dismantle this system.3
    Although the Cold War officially did not start until more than a decade
later, it was in 1937 that most of the French intelligence services set up anti-
Soviet intelligence units, as well as anti-Nazi sections. Soviet intelligence
operatives from NKVD, the Comintern and the GRU were extremely active
in France, as exemplified by the kidnapping in Paris of White Russian
General Yevgeniy Miller in 1937, who the Soviets wanted because he had
plotted against USSR.
    Under the left-wing Popular Front government headed by Léon Blum
that came to power in 1936, several important French intelligence
organisations were set up. In March 1937, a joint organisation called the
‘Contrôle de la Surveillance du Territoire’ (CST) was established, which
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                         179

was the predecessor to the current French counterintelligence unit, the DST.
The CST supervised a nationwide ‘radio-police’ network, which was in
charge of identifying and locating clandestine radio transmitters in France
that were being operated by foreign spies. The DST performs the same
function today.4
    The second new unit was the Service de Renseignement Intercolonial
(Intercolonial Intelligence Service, or SRI), which performed intelligence
collection from, and monitored potential threats to France’s Asian and
African colonies, which included operating listening posts from these
French-controlled overseas territories.
    In 1937, two new technical sections were created within the SR
intelligence service: Captain Paul Arnaud set up a radio transmission
section known as Radio-Chimie-Photo (RCP); while a separate unit, called
simply Section D, intercepted and decoded foreign communications traffic.
An expert in cryptography then working at the French Army GHQ’s Cipher
Section, Commandant Gustave Bertrand, joined the SR and was given
command of Section D.
    Finally, a new unit called Section ‘I’ (which stood for Intercept) was
established along with a Naval Intelligence Cipher Section. Radio intercept
operators belonging to an organisation called the Réseau d’Ecoute et de
Radiogoniométrie des émissions radio-électriques étrangères (Listening and
Direction-finding Network for Monitoring Foreign Radio-Electric
Communications, or REG for short) were stationed at various intercept
stations throughout France, the most of important of which was Le Mont
Valérien outside Paris.

THE BIRTH OF THE R A D I O - E L E C T R O N I C COMMUNICATIONS
GROUP

When Hitler’s army occupied France in 1940, French military intelligence
analysts and Sigint technicians from the disbanded REG regrouped in Vichy
to create a new Sigint organisation called the Groupement de
communications radioélectriques (Radioelectronic Communications Group,
or GCR), headed by Colonel Paul Labat and Lieutenant Colonel Gabriel
Romon. Although they were located in the capital of the newly-created
Vichy collaborationist regime, they kept the communications of the German
Army in the northern occupied zone of France under surveillance.5 Colonel
Romon also provided much valuable information to the 3,000-person
‘Alliance’ intelligence network in France, which was led by one of the most
important and successful of the leaders of the French Resistance, Marie-
Madeleine Fourcade. The Alliance Network provided Britain’s MI6 with
invaluable intelligence information throughout the war.6
180     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     Working officially for the Postes & Télécommunications (P&T), the
GCR ran six intercept stations and operated an analysis center in the town
of Hauterive near Vichy. They decoded some 3,000 messages from the
German Luftwaffe and Wehrmacht. Commandant Bertrand (whose alias
was ‘Gaudefroy’ in the Resistance), worked with the GCR, bringing the
results of this cryptanalytic work to a clandestine base in Cadix, from where
they secretly sent to London to be used by Allied intelligence analysts. But
Bertrand was arrested by the Nazis, and was sent to a concentration camp.7
     When the Nazis occupied France’s southern zone (‘La Zone Libre’) in
late 1942, Colonels Romon and Labat were captured and sent to a German
concentration camp, where they both died. Both men are remembered today
within the French intelligence community as heroes of the Sigint war
against Germany. Before being captured, Colonel Labat had managed to
send to the US data on the GCR direction-finding equipment that he had
developed in order to locate clandestine Nazi transmitters in the non-
occupied zone of France. These technical documents helped the Americans
develop the best anti-submarine detection system used during World War
II.8
     Outside of occupied France, other French cryptologic organisations
were created. In Algiers in 1942, the SR had a Technical Control Service led
by Albéric de Maistre, which intercepted Axis communications traffic. In
London, General Charles de Gaulle’s Free French secret service, the Bureau
Central de Renseignement et d’Action (Central Bureau for Research and
Action, or BCRA) was founded by André Dewavrin, whose codename
during the war was ‘Passy’. The BCRA also had a Technical Section (TCF)
under a Captain Lecot (codename ‘Drouot’), which was in charge of coding
and decoding messages. Lecot operated jointly with the British experts from
the Government Code and Cipher School (GC&CS) and the Special
Operations Executive (SOE).
     Before the war, the chief of the BCRA Intelligence Section, Jean Fleury
(‘Panier’), had been a technical director with Radio-France, Radio-Paris and
Radio-Saigon from 1927 to 1939. It should therefore come as no surprise
that he was instrumental in organising clandestine transmitters for the
Resistance inside France, such as the ‘Electre’ network near Lyons in 1942;
and made sure that BCRA agents parachuted into France could avoid being
located when sending shortwave radio messages by the German
FunkAbwehr’s mobile direction-finding vehicles (which the French
referred to as ‘voitures-gonio’, or direction finding cars).
     French and British intelligence officers at this time also invented a new
form of clandestine communications called ‘personal messages’, by which
secret messages could be sent to operatives in occupied France buried inside
innocuous messages broadcast over the radio. This form of secret
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                            181
communications was used throughout the Cold War, and is still in use today
around the world. According to French counterintelligence officials, foreign
intelligence agencies are today burying secret messages inside otherwise
innocuous e-mail messages.9
    In December 1942, after the Allies captured Northern Africa, General de
Gaulle asked Colonel Jean Joubert des Ouches to set up a central cipher and
cryptographic department in Algiers. A better choice could not have been
made since Joubert des Ouches had already served in a similar position in
1919 under Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau and Marshal Foch after the
end of World War I.
    By August 1943, a decree from the French Committee for the National
Liberation (CFLN) signed by Generals Henri Giraud and Charles de Gaulle,
both rivals at the time for the position of head of the French government,
gave birth to an inter-ministerial organisation called the Direction
Technique des Chiffres (Cipher Technical Directorate), which was formed
to separate the special Comint operations conducted by the secret service
BCRA from the future French government’s cipher and communications
section, which was controlled by the DTC.
    In 1943 and 1944, the French conducted a series of special operations in
Algeria and Tunisia to locate and arrest Muslim nationalists who had been
trained by the Abwehr and parachuted into North Africa. These operations
were called ‘Atlas’ and ‘Anti-Atlas’. Once aircraft from the German
Gartenfeld squadron had parachuted these Algerians back into their
homeland, they were supposed to collect intelligence and radio back to
Berlin (and later to Siegmaringen) the information they had picked up.
Almost all of the agents, however, were located by French radio finding
operations, and after they were captured they were given a simple choice:
either take part in a radio deception operation against their former
employers or else be shot.
    One of the agents who won some fame, although he was never very
talkative about the incident, was a young Kabyle from Algeria named
Mohammedi Said, alias Si Nacer. Because he agreed to play the French
game under the supervision of the French Radiogoniometric Control
Section, his life was spared and he was jailed for ten years. He was freed
from prison in 1954, just in time to join the Algerian insurrection against the
French, and as a leading figure of the Algerian maquis, always wore a Nazi
helmet as a gesture of defiance. Once Algeria was freed, he became the
Minister of Independence War Veterans. In the 1990s, before he died,
Mohammedi Saïd became a senior éminence grise of the Algerian Muslim
fundamentalist party, the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS). In 1991, the
Algerian Army staged a coup d’état when it appeared certain that the FIS
was about to win nationwide elections, and then banned the FIS. By 1992,
182     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

a full-fledged civil war was raging in Algeria between the Algerian military
and Muslim fundamentalists. This bloody war continues to this day.10
     As France was being liberated during the summer of 1944, the French
government began creating a new intelligence organisation by fusing
together the pre-war services, the former Free French intelligence services
from Algeria and Britain, and the internal Resistance. In November 1944,
this organisation became the Direction Générale des Etudes et des
Recherches (General Directorate for Studies and Research, or DGER). Its
first director was Jacques Soustelle, who was subsequently replaced by
André Dewavrin (‘Passy’). Colonel Jean Fleury naturally became head of
the DGER Technical Directorate (cipher and radios). The newly Service
Technique de Recherche (Technical Research Service, or STR) was
organized by Commandant Gustave Bertrand, who as detailed above, had
played a key role as head of Section D in the prewar SR and in the
Resistance.
    The DGER, with 10,000 officers and NCOs, many of whom were
latecomers to the Resistance, became notorious for its corruption and
inefficiency. Its Directorate of Technical Control (DCT) interfered with
telephone communications within France for political motives. The US
forces in France also took the opportunity to set up some discreet intercept
bases in places like Marseilles in the south of France. Lieutenant Stasia
O’Neill, an Irishwoman who had served in the Resistance in Southern
France, was attached to the US Counterintelligence Corps unit in Marseilles
in 1944, and later recalled in an interview with the author:11
      Our service had as its cover name Signal Communication Installation
      of Delta Base Section. I worked under Colonel Ira P. Doctor of the
      Signal Corps, and Captain Fitzpatrick of the CIC (Counterintelligence
      Corps). Our entire set-up in the Rue de la Bourse at Marseilles was
      linked to the telephone exchange. Sixty-two persons were then
      working day and night at the exchange. We listened in to people
      suspected of collaboration during the war, and also to Resistance
      groups or French political groupings. The section for civilian
      enquiries (CID) was concerned above all with the ‘purge’ of
      collaborators, and the Information Service with the provision of
      intelligence to the secret services in Washington.
    As time went by, a good working relationship developed between the US
and French intelligence services. At the time that the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) was formed in 1947, its Paris station, headed by Philip Clark
Horton, began distributing selected American Sigint materials to the French
intelligence services.12
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                        183
THE BIRTH OF FRENCH POST-WAR SIGINT

After the end of the war, the wartime BCRA leader, Colonel Dewarin
(‘Passy’) was asked by General de Gaulle to reorganise the DGER and
thwart Communist infiltration within the French intelligence community.
By order of a ministerial decree dated 28 December 1945, Dewarin founded
a new French foreign intelligence service, the Service de documentation
extérieure et de contre-espionnage (SDECE).
    The SDECE’s headquarters was established inside the Caserne Mortier
on the Rue Tourelles in downtown Paris. All who worked inside SDECE
headquarters referred to the place as ‘La Piscine’, which in English
translates to‘TheSwimming-Pool’. Within the SDECE there were two units
that were responsible for the service’s communications and signals
intelligence activities.
    The first was the ‘Service des matériels techniques’, or the SDECE
Technical Services (known within the SDECE as ‘Service 26’) under the
command of Colonel Paul Arnaud, who ran this department until 1964.
Arnaud supervised sections such as 26/2, under Navy Captain Ducorps,
which was in charge of communications between SDECE headquarters and
its overseas stations. Section 26/4 under two civilians named Massport and
Christin, was responsible for protecting the communications of the French
deputy military attachés and ‘chargés de mission’ in French embassies
overseas, who were in fact SDECE undercover operatives. Service 26 had
12 powerful radio transmitters at the SDECE station in Alluets-le-Roi near
Paris, which were responsible for handling the service’s overseas
communications traffic, as well as occasionally engaging in Sigint
intercept.13
    Service 26 worked closely with ‘Service 28’, or Technical Research
Service (Service Technique de Recherches, or STR), which was the SDECE
unit responsible for intercepting and deciphering foreign diplomatic
communications traffic coming in and out of the embassies in Paris and
elsewhere. The section’s headquarters was located at 9 Avenue Maunoury
in downtown Paris, but its main technical station remained at Le Mont
Valérien outside Paris, where the linguists and technicians worked. Service
28 was led by the legendary Gustave Bertrand, who had since been
promoted to General. It was Bertrand who, in October 1948, through the
head of Swiss intelligence, Colonel Max Waibel, established the first
contacts with General Reinhard Gehlen, the former German military
intelligence officer who was to found the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND)
in 1956. Shortly thereafter, the two former enemies began exchanging
Sigint intercepts from the Soviet bloc. The Cold War may have begun in
1947, but both men had fought the Soviets long before.14
184     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Bertrand’s deputy was Lieutenant Colonel Black, who had organised the
‘I’ Naval Station in Morocco in 1937, which monitored Axis and Spanish
naval and shipping traffic. A cipher specialist, he had stayed in North
Africa and helped in the radio wireless war as head of the Centre
Interarmées d’interception radiogonio et de décryptement (Inter-Army
Center for Radio Direction Finding, Intercept and Deciphering, or CURD)
in Rabat before rallying with his Center to the Free French cause in 1943.
When Bertrand, then SDECE deputy director in overall charge of the
agency’s Technical Department, quit in 1949, Black replaced him.
Unfortunately, Black had to resign when the French internal security service
felt that French codes may have been compromised by Black’s secretary,
who was suspected of being a Soviet agent, recruited in Algiers by the
NKVD in 1942.15
    But the SDECE’s Sigint responsibilities were limited to diplomatic
communications intelligence. All other Sigint collection and processing
functions were assigned to a new organisation. On 15 March 1946, a
provisional government decree revived the former Vichy French Comint
organisation, the Radioelectronic Communications Group (GCR). It was
placed under the Président du Conseil (the French Prime Minister), and had
a budget of FFr 450 million. The GCR reactivated the old Sigint collection
and processing center at Le Mont Valérien near the town of Suresnes, where
hundreds of French Resistance fighters had been executed by the Nazis
during World War II. The former special radio school at Hauterive near
Vichy was also reopened to train French radio intercept technicians for work
with the GCR in France and abroad.16
    The first Director General of the GCR was a French Army officer,
Colonel Bodin. All senior management positions within the GCR were held
by French military personnel, although a significant portion of the GCR’s
professional staff were civilians. The GCR was a rather large agency by the
standards of the day, even when compared with GCHQ in Britain at the
time. On 3 October 1948, according to the well-informed satirical weekly
magazine Aux Ecoutes, a law was passed earlier that year that provided for
a supplementary appropriation of FFr 542 million to pay the salaries of the
2,900 military and civilian staff who worked for the GCR.17
    The GCR operated a world-wide network of radio intercept and
direction-finding stations. According to a declassified report, as of October
1947, the GCR was operating listening posts in Paris and elsewhere
in Metropolitan France, as well as overseas at Algiers (Algeria), Ajaccio
(Corsica), Saigon (Vietnam), Noumea (French Polynesia), Tunis (Tunisia),
Rabat (Morocco) and Dakar (Senegal). Also at about this time, the
SDECE opened a small listening post within the French sector of
West Berlin.18
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                           185

    The self-reliant GCR worked almost exclusively for the SDECE. The
GCR was described in a May 1950 French National Assembly financial
report as a ‘service that centralises in principle all radio listening and
direction finding (DF) resources in France and the French Union. Placed
under the Prime Minister’s office, this service works roughly 80 to 90 per
cent of the time to fulfill the SDECE’s needs.’ The remaining 10 to 20 per
cent of the GCR’s intercept operations were for the French Army General
Staff.19
    Another important aspect of SDECE radio operations consisted of
sending coded messages to French agents operating behind the Iron Curtain.
At this time, the SDECE began parachuting agents into Yugoslavia,
Czechoslovakia and Albania. Messages destined for these agents were sent
from a SDECE radio station hidden within a mansion at Montmorency,
northwest of Paris. But the agent insertion operation, called Operation
‘Minos’, failed and the police and internal security operatives of the Eastern
European nations caught the agents as they landed. A subsequent internal
inquiry by the SDECE concluded that the operation had been betrayed by
someone within the small radio team at Montmorency, or elsewhere within
the SDECE leadership.20
    From the time that French troops began occupying a portion of Germany
in 1945, the SDECE maintained an intelligence collection unit in its
occupation sector called the Direction de la Recherche en Allemagne
(Research Directorate in Germany, or DRA), which included a large and
important Sigint intercept station at ‘Camp Napoléon’ in West Berlin,
whose antennae were directed at communications traffic coming from East
Germany. By the mid-1950s, the SDECE Berlin listening post was
successfully intercepting a wide range of East German military and security
communications traffic.
    This station worked hand-in-hand with specialized French Army
intelligence units in the French occupation zone of West Germany, such as
the French Army listening post outside Landau that was operated by the 44th
Régiment de Transmissions (44th RT), which monitored Soviet military
radio transmissions coming from East Germany and Czechoslovakia; as
well as an HFDF outstation at Appen, northwest of the city of Hamburg. By
1954, the French Air Force’s Sigint organisation in West Germany, Group
Electronique 30/450, activated an HF listening post on top of a mountain
near the town of Achern opposite the French city of Strasbourg. HFDF
outstations were established at Freiburg and Furstenfeldbruck near Munich.
Also in the early 1950s, the French Army’s 42nd Régiment de
Transmissions and a detachment of the French Air Force’s Groupe
Electronique 30/450 established a listening post in a specially constructed
tower on the grounds of Berlin-Tegel Airport in West Berlin.21
186     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    The SDECE, the GCR and the military were not the only French
government agencies engaged in Sigint collection. On the other side of the
intelligence spectrum, the civilian counterintelligence agency, the Direction
de la Surveillance du Territoire (DST), which fell under the control of the
Interior Ministry, had its own counterintelligence radio-electronic
monitoring system. On the fourth floor of the DST headquarters on the Rue
des Saussaies in Paris, a former lawyer named Paul Berliat set up a unit
called the Police de contrôle radioélectrique (PCR), which operated
intercept stations in Boullay-les-Trous (Yvelines Prefecture) and Limours
(Essonne Prefecture) that monitored foreign radio programs as well as
clandestine radio transmissions.
    With a few so-called Centre d’Ecoutes et de Radiogoniométrie
(Listening and Direction Finding Centers, or CER) spread throughout
France (specifically at Nancy, Marseilles, Rennes, Toulouse and Lille), the
DST intercepted coded messages between foreign radio stations and
clandestine agents operating in France. Among their many successes, the
DST intercepted the radio transmissions between the Czech capital of
Prague and the underground Spanish Communist Party in France. The DST
under Roger Wybot, whose actions and psychological make-up bore a
striking similarity to his American counterpart, FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover, also managed to bug the French Communist Party headquarters in
Paris. In 1949, the DST was concentrating on monitoring the activities of the
French Communist Party’s Secret Radio Communications Section, which
had been run since the Nazi occupation by Auguste Lecœur. Lecœur was
later expelled from the French Communist Party in the wake of a Stalinist
purge in the 1950s because of allegations that he was a ‘police informer’.22


THE ‘DALAT MONKS’ OF THE SDECE IN I N D O C H I N A

In the 1950s, the decolonisation process led to the increased use of Sigint as
the French Army sought to combat armed nationalist movements in French
colonies around the world. At the end of World War II, French military and
special forces returned to Indochina, initially to fight the Japanese forces
occupying the former French colony in Southeast Asia. After Emperor
Hirohito’s surrender in September 1945, the French forces became involved
in a bloody and protracted war against Communist guerrilla forces in
Vietnam, who called themselves the Viet Minh. The political leader of the
Viet Minh was Ho Chi Minh, a formidable strategist who received at
different times military support from the Chinese, the Soviets and even
the Americans in his fight against the Japanese. His military commander
was a talented soldier and extremely capable strategist named General Vo
Nguyen Giap.
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                            187
     Because of the difficulties inherent in managing and coordinating a
 large-scale military campaign against the colonial French forces, the Viet
 Minh depended to a great degree, but not entirely, on HF radio
 communications to direct their conventionally-structured military forces
 deployed throughout North and South Vietnam. Much of Vietnam’s terrain
 was hilly or mountainous and heavily vegetated, and the Communist forces
 were mobile guerrilla units who usually operated far from their parent unit.
 The Viet Minh regiments and lower echelons of command therefore used
 lightweight, low-powered radio sets for their communications which they
 had either captured from the French or been given by the Chinese. Because
 of their low power, these radio sets could not be heard in Hanoi, much less
 the neighbouring province, which made the job of intercepting their
 transmissions exceedingly difficult. The Viet Minh also employed at an
 early stage sophisticated cipher systems to protect their most important
radio traffic from prying ears. Despite these precautions, the French were
 able to solve many of the cryptographic systems used by the Viet Minh.
     Vietnam was an extremely difficult environment for conducting
effective Sigint collection, not just for the French, but also for the American
forces who followed them. Despite the Viet Minh’s communications
security procedures, the French Comint intercept service in Indochina, the
GCR was able to collect large amounts of Viet Minh radio traffic, and the
French cryptanalytic agency in Indochina, the Services Technique des
Recherches (STR), managed to solve the Viet Minh logistical code, as well
as part or all of several Viet Minh operational codes used between 1947 and
 1957. The French were also able to track the movements and activities of
Viet Minh combat units because the Vietnamese radio operators violated
every tenet of good communications security procedures by
indiscriminately using their radios. A 1952 French report stated that: ‘The
study of enemy radio is by far our best source of intelligence.’ But the
success and the amount of material produced by the French Comint
organisations in Indochina was so great that it outstripped the ability of the
available French intelligence analysts to adequately process the Viet Minh
intercepts.23
    Codebreaking was not the only French success story in the intelligence
war against the Viet Minh. As early as 1950, the French Air Force had
mounted World War II-vintage radio intercept receivers and direction
finding equipment in an American-made PBY Catalina amphibious patrol
aircraft, which the French used to locate Viet Minh targets for parachute
assaults. In 1953, the French abandoned the slow and ungainly Catalina
flying boat, and put radio direction-finding gear on Nord NC.701 Martinets
and a Beech C-45 twin-engined transport aircraft in order to monitor Viet
Minh radio transmitters. Although a small effort, the French ARDF program
188     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

was sufficiently successful that captured Viet Minh documents ordered
radio operators to maintain radio discipline in order to counter the French
ARDF threat.24
    The successful French Comint collection effort against the Viet Minh in
Indochina by the Services Techniques de Recherches (STR) and the GCR
was directed by a specially created organisation in Indochina called the
Direction générale de la documentation (DGD), headed by Colonel Maurice
Labadie from his headquarters in Saigon. The SDECE in Indochina, led by
Colonel Maurice Belleux, formed its own special Sigint organisation at
Dalat in the Vietnamese Highlands with personnel seconded from Service 28
in Paris. By the mid-1950s, the SDECE Sigint organisation in Indochina had
become a vast organisation, supported by radio direction-finding materials
from listening posts run by France’s foreign partners in Hong Kong and
Taiwan. As Belleux explained to the author: ‘At Dalat, dozens of men,
grouped into an interception unit, devoted themselves to the task. For every
code, I set up two-man teams. They lived like monks; they were separated
off, working feverishly, shut away until they had succeeded in breaking
“their” code. Then, and only then, did I send them off on leave to relax and
rest. And through this system we obtained a 60–80 per cent success rate: the
messages of the Viet Minh General staff were decoded. Then we passed on
the reports, so that they could be acted on. Unfortunately, at GHQ there were
many recipients who did not believe the reports. It was absolutely incredible.
General Raoul Salan [commander of French forces in Indochina] was one of
those who gave us due credit for our work.’25
    Thus, at the time of the Cao Bang disaster in 1950, the SDECE was able
to report on the basis of Sigint that eight Viet Minh battalions were being
trained in the newly-formed People’s Republic of China. However, in high
places within the French military in Indochina, the enemy was underrated.
In the end, in spite of the fact that the SDECE was able to successfully
monitor and exploit Viet Minh communications, the superior forces and the
brilliant skill in ‘People’s Warfare’ by General Vo Nguyen Giap ensured the
encirclement and ultimate destruction of a French expeditionary force at
Dien Bien Phu in 1954. Just before Dien Bien Phu, General Giap had
learned of the successful French Sigint operations and had changed his
operational codes.26
    Lieutenant General Wang Zheng, head of the Chinese People’s
Liberation Army 3rd Department and the Special Nanyang Radio School,
helped the Vietnamese develop their own Sigint effort. But at Dien Bien
Phu, despite Soviet and Chinese support and assistance, the Viet Minh could
not understand the radio transmissions by the French radio operators, many
of whom came from Brittany and used their Celtic language when talking
on the radio.27
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                         189

    In spite of the mistrust between the French General Staff and the US,
partly due to OSS support for Ho Chi Minh ten years earlier during World
War II, there was a limited intelligence sharing agreement between the
French forces in Indochina and the US intelligence community. Early in
1951, the CIA provided the French with 100 radio intercept receivers for
use in Indochina, and an informal agreement was reached whereby the
French, British and Americans split up the responsibility for Comint
coverage of China and agreed to share Comint product from these
operations.
    There also appears to have been an unwritten Comint-sharing agreement
between the French and American armies, whereby in return for HFDF
bearings from the US Army Security Agency (ASA) listening post at Clark
Air Base in the Philippines, the French STR passed to the American
embassy in Saigon copies of finished Comint reports gathered by French
military listening posts in Vietnam and Laos.
    After the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 and the subsequent
withdrawal of French forces from Indochina in 1956, a 40-man French
Army Comint unit remained in Indochina to run five intercept and HFDF
posts. But in mid-1957 the French Comint personnel left the country after
disagreements arose between the French and the new president of South
Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, who had formerly been an agent in the pay of the
dreaded Japanese secret police, the Kempeitai, during World War II. Three
of the French HFDF sites, at Rula Ray near Quang Ngai, Con Son Island,
and Ha Tien were taken over by the South Vietnamese in July 1954. These
sites used old American AN/SCR-255 HFDF sets which the Vietnamese
inherited from the French, but these were World War II-vintage pieces of
equipment which had long since been phased out of service in the US
because they were inaccurate, unreliable and difficult to maintain. The
South Vietnamese were never able to get these sites operational after the
French departed and they soon fell into a state of disrepair.28


THE C O M M U N I C A T I O N S WAR FOR A L G E R I A

At the same time that French forces were being defeated in Indochina, in
late 1954 another insurgency movement flared up in a French colony, this
time in French North Africa. Some of the Algerian nationalist leaders had
been recruited by the Nazis during World War II, as we have seen in the case
of Mohammedi Saïd. Others, like the future President of Algeria, Ahmed
Ben Bella, had fought in the French Army in Italy and helped liberate
France. After the war, they did not understand why their own country was
not given its independence by France. This was the root-cause of the
November 1954 insurrection in Algeria by the‘Special Organisation’,
190     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

 which became the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN), which fought
an eight-year war against the French, without mercy shown on either side.
     Four years later, on 21 September 1958, two young women belonging to
the FLN tried to blow up the Eiffel Tower. They knew that on the third floor
of the tower’s observation deck, the DST had installed radio transmitters to
relay messages to DST mobile surveillance units, as well as jam shortwave
FLN communications, including radio transmissions such as the‘Voix de
l’Algérie combattante’(Fighting Algeria’s Voice) that was beamed at the
Paris region for consumption by Algerian immigrants living in the French
capital. Besides, the blast would have been very demoralising for the French
if it had succeeded. But the DST acted swiftly thanks to insider information
and crushed the plot.
     This was all part of what was known at the time as the‘ w a r of the
radiowaves’. The SDECE organised‘black radio’stations, such as the
Arabic-language‘Voice of Reform’, which was meant to support a pseudo-
group called the Movement for Algerian Renaissance (MRA) that had split
from the main Algerian resistance organisation, the‘Mouvement national
algérien’ (MNA), which was a left-wing Algerian party founded by the
‘father of Algerian nationalism’ Messali Hadj, which opposed terrorism as
a means to gain independence.
     In August 1958, another‘ b l a c k ’radio transmitter known as Shark al-
Adna began operations from the French Riviera. Another station,
codenamed‘Kléber’, was set up in the town of Jouy-sur-Eure near Chartres,
and broadcast programs in the Arabic and Kabyle languages under the
supervision of François Bistos, the director of the SDECE archives. Bistos
was later expelled from La Piscine in 1970 when it was discovered that he
was a‘Romanian spy’.
     Until 1962, the SDECE supplemented this with radio programs
broadcast on medium waves towards Egypt using a 300-kilowatt radio
transmitter in Marseilles (which is today the local State Television FR3
station), with the help of one of Egyptian leader Colonel Gamel Abdul
Nasser’s former friends who had been‘turned’by French intelligence.
     The war in Algeria led to an expansion of the SDECE’s Sigint efforts. In
the early 1960s, the SDECE Sigint unit, Service 28, was renamed Section
III, under the command of a Mr Blanchard. Section III’s Sigint efforts were
managed by the SDECE Technical Division (referred to within the SDECE
as‘Service 5’), headed by Colonel Paul Arnaud. Despite the change in
names, the unit’s mission remained the same– the interception and
decryption of foreign diplomatic communications, including those of the
FLN. During the early stages of the war in Algeria, from 1954 to 1959, the
SDECE Sigint organisation proved to be very efficient in intercepting and
reading FLN radio traffic.
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                        191
     Then in 1959, as Constantin Melnik, then the French Prime Minister’s
intelligence adviser acknowledged, the FLN changed their codes and made
them impossible to decipher. Despite their inability to read the encrypted
FLN traffic, French human intelligence (Humint) together with traffic
analysis of FLN radio messages revealed a political split within the FLN
leadership, which was reflected in a fracturing of FLN radio networks inside
Algeria, as well as between FLN bases in the neighboring states of
Morocco, Egypt and Tunisia.29
     During the Franco-Algerian war, a military intelligence unit called
Services Techniques (Technical Services) was set up on the Rue Michelet in
downtown Algiers under the command of a Colonel Tesseyre, who had
formerly been a 2ème Bureau intelligence officer in Indochina. He
supervised a GCR department in Algeria consisting of two Sigint units: (1)
an intercept and deciphering unit; and (2) fixed and mobile radio direction-
finding units, such as T26 direction-finding aircraft. This organisation
worked under the direction of the Centre de Coordination Interarmées
(Inter-Army Coordination, or CCI) in Algiers, led by Colonel Léon
Simoneau, which worked closely with the SDECE’s Northern African
‘delegate’, Jean Allemand (alias ‘Colonel Germain’). Allemand, thanks to
communications intercepts, was able to organize the first airplane hijacking
in human history. He diverted to Algeria an Air Atlas DC-3 plane flying
from Rabat to Tunis. That plane carried the most important leaders of the
 Algerian revolution: Ahmed Ben Bella, Muhammed Boudiaf, Hocine Aït
 Ahmed and others, all of whom remained in prison until Algeria obtained
 its independence in 1962.30
      Meanwhile, Charles de Gaulle returned to power in 1958, and he asked
 the French intelligence services to‘ a c t on all fronts’, which included a
 mandate to spy on the American and British agents who supported Algerian
 independence. Long before France withdrew from NATO in 1966, the
 DST’s American Section, codename‘Mejean’, eavesdropped on the US
 embassy in Paris and other American diplomatic interests in France.31 This
 was made easier by the modernisation that took place within the French
 intelligence community.
      In the 1960s, the SDECE’s Technical Service, led by Colonel Pelletier
 and then by Colonel Eugène Caillaud, was still responsible for coding and
 decoding messages between SDECE headquarters and its agents abroad. It
 worked closely with the GCR,– which still reported to the Prime Minister’s
 office– whose 1,000 military personal continued to perform‘surveillance
 of the radio waves and the unmasking of clandestine transmissions to
 foreign countries’.32 Many of the radio intercept operators came from the
 French Navy, which historically has produced the best-trained radio and
 intercept operators. This was exemplified by the career of Navy
192     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Commander Michel Steichen, who became the operational head of the GCR
at Le Mont Valérien during the 1960s, and remained in this position for a
decade until the 1970s. During the early 1960s, 54 GCR Sigint operators
and analysts were integrated into the SDECE headquarters as a separate
‘Analysis Staff. They worked so hard that that one of the chiefs of the
SDECE Technical Department, a mathematician and cipher expert, died of
a heart attack in his office at SDECE headquarters on the Boulevard Mortier
trying to crack FLN codes.33
    In 1959, at the height of the Algerian War, the French Intelligence
Coordinator, Constantin Melnik, was given‘carte blanche’to organise a
centralised phone-tapping system in France. To perform this mission, a new
organisation called the Groupement interministériel des communications
(Inter-ministerial Communication Group, or GIC) was formed, commanded
initially by Colonel Labrosse, and later by Colonel Caillaud who had been
seconded to the GIC from the SDECE. Working on requests from the
SDECE, DST and other French police units, the GIC engaged in a massive
eavesdropping effort within France, but engineers from GIC and the GCR
worked occasionally on joint foreign intelligence projects, and signals
technicians frequently transferred from one organisation to the other.
    In October 1965, the Moroccan opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka was
kidnapped in Paris and probably murdered by King Hassan’s secret service
with the help of French policemen,‘spooks’and criminals. He was never
seen again, and even today his ultimate fate remains an unsolved mystery in
the history of the French Fifth Republic. The SDECE was indirectly
involved, insofar as one of the men involved was a part-time agent (the term
used was‘honorable correspondent’) of the SDECE’s Service 7. This was
responsible for the acquisition of intelligence by surreptitious means, such
as stealing or opening diplomatic bags, bugging hotel rooms, etc. As a
consequence of a trial and scandal that affected the Gaullist regime, on 19
January 1966 responsibility for the management of SDECE was withdrawn
from the Prime Minister’s office– then Georges Pompidou, and instead
placed under the auspices of the French Ministry of Defense. In fact, since
then the chain of command has usually been short-circuited by the
presidential adviser on intelligence and security matters. The fallout from
the Ben Barka scandal momentarily disorganised the SDECE-GCR
arrangement.
    Another Sigint problem further undermined the SDECE’s operational
intelligence activities. It came from the Anglo-American UKUSA Pact and
their decrypts of Soviet KGB communications traffic during World War II,
the so-called Venona decrypts. Extracts from the Venona documents relating
to France were handed over by the British internal security service, MI5, to
their French counterpart, the DST. In this organisation an obsessive‘red
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                         193
mole hunter’comparable to James J. Angleton in the CIA, investigated the
SDECE leadership as well as some of de Gaulle’s close collaborators. This
person was Marcel Chalet. That DST team felt, thanks to the Venona
information and the confession of the KGB defector Anatoly Golitsin, it
would be possible to unearth the Russian‘moles’. The end result was quite
different, but pleased equally the KGB, the CIA and the DST: it disrupted
the SDECE for at least five years, and created ill-will and distrust towards
the French on the part of the NATO intelligence community for a long
time.34
    The irony was that because they trusted their US sources, the French
security services genuinely tried to uproot the Soviet‘moles’in their midst.
But by 1964, because of security considerations, the US had cut the French
off from further access to American Sigint information.

A L E X A N D R E DE M A R E N C H E S SWALLOWS THE GCR

The man who purged the SDECE of suspect elements, and at the same time
reforged the alliance with the US intelligence services was Count Alexandre
de Marenches, who headed the SDECE for almost 11 years, from June 1970
to December 1981. One of De Marenches’first acts was to take control of
the GCR. In July 1970, the some 1,000 GCR staff members were absorbed
into the SDECE, which was officially placed under the command of the
Ministry of Defense on 13 January 1971. Following the takeover, for a few
years the GCR remained an autonomous service under the supervision of
the SDECE Technical Division (known as‘Service 5’). The commander of
the GCR at this time was Colonel André Benoît, who was also the director
of the large Le Mont Valérien Sigint processing center and additional
outstations, such as the station at the fort in Noisy-le-Sec outside Paris,
which was also the headquarters of the SDECE Action Service.
    Later in the 1970s, the GCR was fully merged into the SDECE
Technical Division, which then consisted of all of the former SDECE and
GCR Sigint assets. But the new division remained responsible for
conducting strategic signals intelligence collection and maintaining
various Sigint collection stations around the world.35 The GCR fell under
the‘Moyens techniques’, or Technical Department of the SDECE, which
in 1971 was commanded by the Colonel Delamalle and his deputy Colonel
Dardot. At the time of the GCR’s integration into the SDECE in 1970, the
GCR consisted of about 1,200 technicians, 800 of whom worked directly
for the SDECE, with the others employed by various other French
intelligence units. The GCR was described in a 1973 newspaper report as
follows:‘ . . . the Le Mont Valéien staff are monitoring all radio-electric
signals [in order] to decipher them’.36
194     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Another part of Alexandre de Marenches’reorganisation plan was,
because of Marenches’s close relationship with the Anglo-American
intelligence community, he felt France could be part of the UK-USA pact
without officially joining. Under Marenches, NSA, GCHQ and the
reorganised SDECE/GCR restarted the process of exchanging Sigint
information. The integration of the GCR into the SDECE created problems,
principally because of the clash of cultures between the civilian-dominated
GCR and the military-dominated SDECE management. Many in the GCR
staff, which was reduced to 500, disapproved of the new administrative
regime of the SDECE, which was much more restrictive than under the
previous system when they worked under the Prime Minister’s office and
were treated as civil servants, just like teachers or postmen. In a battle
reminiscent of the British GCHQ situation in the mid-1980s, the right to
belong to trade unions was restricted. To ice the cake, a special SDECE
investigative team felt that some GCR personnel had been recruited by the
KGB in Berlin, which led to what the trade unions representing GCR
employees described as a‘witchhunt’. The head of counterintelligence
within SDECE– Colonel Chopin de Janvry– and DST security personnel
interviewed the suspected GCR staff in such a brutal manner that some later
committed suicide.37
    The CGT trade union made public the suicide of three GCR engineers in
the 1970s, one in Berlin (a senior officer named Georges Blanc), and the
other two (Claudine Sokolowski and Edmond Dessille) who worked at the
Sigint station at Domme in the Dordogne region. Georges Blanc had spent
35 years in the GCR, having joined the GCR in 1941. He was a longtime
trade union member– just like Bernard Collin, the Berlin GCR controller –
and he refused to formally join the SDECE and abandon his union benefits.
Under constant pressure, he committed suicide in Berlin, but not before
writing a damning letter addressed to SDECE’s leaders. The SDECE
security section had obviously tried to sidetrack people who could have
been labeled as sympathetic to the Communist cause who were at the
forefront of the anti-Soviet Sigint battle. In July 1978, the ‘deep malaise’
became a matter of public record when the daily newspaper Le Monde
reported that it was affecting France’s espionage services, whose activities
were increasingly directed towards operations within France itself.38
    Following the GCR scandals, in 1979 the staff finally was given the
same status and benefits as the agents working for the Interior Ministry’s
Transmission Service (STI). Until the fall of the Iron Curtain in the late
1980s, the special SDECE Sigint unit in West Berlin, the‘Antenne du
service technique de recherche avancée de Berlin’(Technical Service
Station for Advanced Research in Berlin, or ASTRAB) was successful in
intercepting high-level East German communications. However, since the
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                          195
STASI was able to infiltrate the GCR and the local DST, the East Germans
were able to protect their communications and even manipulate what
ASTRAB was listening to. Later, in the early 1980s ASTRAB also
monitored the communications of the Libyan Mission in East Berlin, and
was able to determine that the Libyans were responsible for the 5 April 1984
bomb attack against US military personnel in the La Belle discotheque in
West Berlin.
    In spite of these problems, the Sigint efforts of the SDECE Technical
Services met with success. For instance, the SDECE was able to forecast the
1973 Yom Kippur War thanks to the intercept of Egyptian military radio
transmissions. During the Vietnam War, the GCR listening post at Larçay,
near the city of Tours, was responsible for monitoring signals traffic coming
from Southeast Asia, and it is reported to have monitored US
communications traffic in the region. De Marenches also had a GCR
intercept station built close to his holiday home on Saint-Barthelemy Island
near Guadeloupe, which was conveniently located near the United States.
    The Middle East was an important French Sigint target during the 1970s.
A GCR intercept station at La Courtine in the Creuse region covered the
Middle East. For example, the SDECE monitored communications between
terrorists and the control tower of the Tehran airport where an Air France
plane had been landing.39 In 1979, De Marenches was given transcripts of
Soviet army communications deployed along the Afghan border by his
friend Brian Tovey, who was the director of Britain’s GCHQ. The French
Count immediately sent men to reinforce the SDECE Kabul station inside
Afghanistan, and was able to confirm to French President Valéry Giscard
d’Estaing and to his British friends that the Soviets were about to invade
Afghanistan.40
    Other French clandestine radio stations run by SDECE were sending
‘personal coded messages’ to underground agents on the other side of the
Iron Curtain. One such SDECE unit broadcast Tyrolian music on 6425 Khz
between 11.30 and 11.40 a.m. from the Chartres region, but it ceased its
activities in 1975 after an article was published in a French magazine
specializing in radio matters called Interférences.41
    By the end of the 1970s, the intercept and direction-finding stations
belonging to the GCR Sigint network had been expanded and reinforced,
such as the construction of the new Poncharramet listening post in the
Haute-Garonne region, and the expansion of the independent intercept site
at Domme in the Dordogne region. The Alluets-Feucherolles intercept
station in the Yvelines region west of Paris, which specialised in the
intercept of international telephone calls and faxes, was also modernised in
the 1970s. Another station in a lovely seaside resort in northern Brittany
was located opposite the GCHQ Morwenstow station in Cornwall, and
196      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

interfered with British communications. However, it was subsequently
closed down and the station’s buildings were subsequently used as a holiday
home for retired SDECE agents.42
    In spite of the improved relations between France and the UKUSA
nations, in 1973, under President Georges Pompidou, an important step was
taken towards attaining a greater degree of autonomy when Paris decided to
initiate a national cryptographic industrial effort– thanks in large part to the
efforts of the Thomson-Sagem company– to manufacture electronic
equipment in order to preserve France’s technological independence. Under
President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing (1974–81), several successful covert
operations were conducted by the French in Africa thanks to advanced
reconnaissance work by the long-range reconnaissance personnel of the
French Army’s 13th Regiment of Parachute Dragoons (13e RDP) and Sigint
collected by French Breguet Atlantique and Mirage IV reconnaissance
aircraft. This was the case during the 1977 Shaba revolt in Zaire, and during
military strikes against the Algerian-backed Polisario guerrillas, who
wanted the Western Sahara to secede from Morocco.
    From that period onwards, French military Sigint collection units called
Détachements autonomes de transmission (DAT) became very active in
Africa, especially under the leadership of a SDECE Sigint expert named
Colonel Jubault. They also benefited from intelligence information
collected by the French Sigint listening post at Bouar in the Central African
Republic, where that nation’s ruler,‘ E m p e r o r ’Bokassa, was President
Giscard’s personal friend.

R E O R G A N I S A T I O N UNDER F R A N Ç O I S M I T T E R R A N D

In May 1981, François Mitterrand was elected the President of France, and
a new reorganisation of the SDECE was started. By presidential decree,
dated 4 April 1982, the SDECE was renamed the Direction generale de la
securite exterieure (DGSE). Four years later, on 10 July 1985, DGSE Action
Service operatives sank the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in the harbor
of Auckland, New Zealand. The subsequent scandal did not solely disrupt
the Action Service. The DGSE’s chief Admiral Pierre Lacoste was forced to
resign, and his successor, General René Imbot, launched yet another purge
of the service, which‘La Piscine’seems to undergo every ten years or so.
    One of the victims of the purge was Henri Serres, a telecommunication
engineer and head of the SDECE Technical and Computer Department, who
was largely responsible for expanding and modernising the GCR during the
1970s and 1980s.43 Thanks to substantial increases in the DGSE budget
(from FFr 62 million in 1981 to FFr 310 million by 1988), new hardware
and software was acquired which improved French Sigint operations.
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                           197
Among the improvements was the introduction of a new collection system
designed to intercept transatlantic satellite communications; and the
development of new computerised intelligence collection systems that
permitted the intercept of foreign phone calls, telexes and faxes on the basis
of pre-selected and programmed keywords. It should be pointed out that this
technology was nothing new for the specialists from the American NSA or
British GCHQ.
    Under President Mitterrand, just as it had been under his predecessor
Giscard d’Estaing, French special operations in Africa continued unabated.
In 1987, the operation to combat Colonel Gaddafi’s Libyan troops in Chad,
Operation‘Epervier’, was supervised by elite intelligence personnel from
the French Army’s 11è Choc. Also involved in these operations were French
Navy Breguet Atlantique Sigint collection aircraft. As early as November
1984, a Breguet Atlantique aircraft was being used by the French
intelligence services as a mobile headquarters in Chad, carrying portable
equipment for communications and electronic intercept. The intercepted
Libyan transmissions monitored by the aircraft were immediately decoded
and translated by Arabic linguists, which permitted more accurate and
efficient attacks on the Libyan forces operating in Chad.44
    In January 1988, French Air Force General François Mermet became the
new Director-General of the DGSE. This former flight commander was
very keen to further modernise‘ L a Piscine’s’communications system.
Rumour had it that he wanted to set up a [global Sigint collection] system
similar to that of NSA. This was utterly impossible from a financial point of
view, although he did manage to get a substantial increase in the DGSE’s
budget for technical intelligence. Likewise, the idea of merging the GCR
with the DST’s counterintelligence Sigint intercept unit, the PCR, was
dropped.
    However, it is true that new Thomson-CSF equipment for deciphering
codes was bought under his tenure as chief of the secret service. The main
target still remained the Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellite
countries. Yet these communist countries were to survive for only three
more years. The Middle East seems to have been another priority target.
Indeed in February 1988, as General Mermet was returning from a visit
to the United States to strike up a new partnership with the heads of the
CIA and NSA, two of his DGSE operatives were shot dead in Beirut,
Lebanon.

F R E N C H E L E C T R O N I C WARFARE ASSETS

During the 1970s and 1980s, French Sigint operations were performed
mainly by the DGSE, and to a far lesser extent by a French military
198     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

intelligence unit called the Military Intelligence Exploitation Center (Centre
d’exploitation du renseignement militaire, or CERM), which had been
founded in December 1971 by Colonel Paul Bourgogne. The French
military, however, did possess several extremely valuable special electronic
warfare assets.
     Since 1977, the French Air Force has operated a single four-engine DC-
 8 Sigint collection aircraft known as‘ S a r i g u e ’(Système aéroporté de
recueil d’informations de guerre électronique), which was based at Evreux
Air Base under the command of Escadron electronique 51‘ A u b r a c ’(EE
51). This electronic aircraft, which was the only aircraft assigned to EE 51,
was flown by the French civilian airline UTA before it was equipped with
signals intercept and electronic countermeasures equipment.45
     Since 1989, two Transall C-160‘ G a b r i e l ’electronic warfare aircraft
have operated from Metz-Frescaty Air Base in eastern France. They belong
to Electronic Squadron 54‘Dunkerque’(EE 54), which was formed in 1964.
Able to fly at altitudes of between 7,000 and 10,000 meters, the C-160
Gabriel can intercept communications and radar emissions within a radius
of 800 kilometers around the aircraft. One of these aircraft was based in
Saudi Arabia in the autumn of 1992 to help reinforce the United Nations
operation that banned flights over southern Iraq and enforce the embargo
against the Saddam Hussein regime. It also supplements the operations of
French AWACs aircraft, four of which had been purchased by France.
    Prior to acquiring the‘Gabriel’aircraft in the 1980s, EE 54 used to fly
eight Nord 2501 Noratias transport planes equipped with special electronic
countermeasures equipment to both collect electronics intelligence and
confuse enemy forces.46 According to veterans of these units, some of planes
and helicopters belonging the EE 51 and EE 54 have been at times flown by
a special aircrew detached from the most secret squadron in French
aviation, Groupe Aérien Mixte 56‘Vaucluse’(GAM 56), located at Evreux
Air Base, which is the DGSE’s special air missions unit.
    Likewise, the CERM and DGSE jointly operated a spy ship named the
Berry. Built in 1958 under the name Médoc, she was bought by the French
Defense Ministry in 1964 and based at Toulon. After ten years of service as
a supply ship in the South Pacific, in 1974 the 2,700-ton Berry was
modernised and converted into a spy ship. In the years that followed, the
Berry sailed in the Mediterranean Sea off the coastline of the Middle East
and in the Red Sea, all the while operating as a mobile Sigint intercept
station.47 In the summer 1987, the Berry sailed to the Persian Gulf and
intercepted Iranian communications. During the 1990s, a crisis erupted in
Algeria, prompted by the rise of Islamic fundamentalism in the North
African country, which led to a military coup d’état in 1991. Throughout the
1990s, the Berry, under the command of Captain Jean Le Pivain, was often
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                         199
positioned off the shores of North Africa intercepting Algerian military
communications. To perform these Sigint collection operations, French
officers and NCOs with special linguistic skills in Farsi or Arabic were
embarked in the ship. These linguists were trained at the Strasbourg
Intelligence and Linguistics School (EIREL). The intelligence collected by
this French ship allowed analysts in Paris to draw a clear picture of the
military clashes between the Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas and General
Mohamed Lamari’s Algerian government security forces.
    Besides the Berry, the French Air Force’s Sarigue and Gabriel spy
planes, together with French listening posts in Arabic countries, such as
Djibouti and the United Arab Emirates, were also important intelligence
collectors on events in North Africa and the Middle East.

R E D E P L O Y M E N T AFTER THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL

The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 forced the redeployment of French Sigint
resources formerly deployed in Germany back to France. The Berlin GCR
station (ASTRAB) was dismantled. The 44th Transmission Régiment (44
RT) at Landau in Bavaria, which formerly engaged in Sigint collection
along the borders of East Germany and Czechoslovakia with its‘roving
transmission teams’and‘technical analysis teams’, was also returned to
France. Its new home station is at Mutzig in eastern France.48
    It usually worked hand in hand with the 54th RT at Hagueneau on the
French side of the Rhine River, which was an electronic warfare unit. The
44th RT had a strategic mission, in charge of intercepting high-frequency
radio communications from the Soviet Bloc. By the 1990s, the French Army
Signals Corps included 23,000 soldiers, among whom were 2,000 personnel
working directly in the field of electronic warfare, such as the 738th
Electronic Warfare Company.
    The Escadrons électroniques au sol (EES) in Bad-Lauterberg (near the
Iron curtain), Berlin-Tegel (EES 02), Goslar (EES 03) (Harz) with an Elint
Puma helicopter (HET), Furth-im-Wald (near the Czech border) and Achern
(Schwarzwald) regrouped a hundred technicians who performed ELINT
and Comint operations.

F R E N C H P O S T - C O L D WAR SIGINT

In 1989, exposés in the French press revealed that the DGSE had been
spying on the United States, particularly collecting economic intelligence
against American multinational corporations such as IBM, Corning Glass,
and Texas Instruments. Some of these operations were conducted by agents
assigned to the DGSE stations in New York City and Washington DC. But
200     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the majority of the intelligence collected was derived from Sigint intercepts
of American commercial communications.49
    Some press reports suggested that because of these revelations, the
Director of the DGSE, General Mermet, was forced to resign. In fact, the
changes at the top of the DGSE were more political in nature, prompted by
the 1989 electoral defeat of Jacques Chirac and his conservative
government. In March 1989, the new Socialist Prime Minister, Michel
Rocard, replaced General Mermet with a civilian named Claude Silberzahn,
who was just as keen as his predecessor to expand intelligence operations
against the Americans, and he explicitly said so in the first press interview
ever given by a French secret service chief to the Paris daily newspaper Le
Monde.50
    From this point onwards, the DGSE was managed by a collective
leadership headed by a newly created Director of Intelligence (Directeur du
renseignement). The first incumbent was a former DST official named
Michel Laccariere, who was also the deputy director of the DGSE. His
deputy, the diplomat Jean-Claude Cousseran, held the newly created
position of Director of Strategy (Directeur de la strategie). In 2000,
Cousseran became the head of the DGSE.
    Under Silberzahn, the DGSE was once again reorganised, with Jérôme
Ventre becoming the head of the DGSE Technical Department, which
continued to supervise the service’s Sigint collection operations. Silberzhan
wanted to further develop French Sigint capabilities, especially against
Africa. As he later explained:‘For the DGSE, technical intelligence chiefly
entails the radiogoniometric [direction-finding] network, the system of
communications interception (Comint), radioelectrical signals (Elint), photo
interpretation (Imint) and penetration of computer systems.’51
    Expansion of the DGSE’s Sigint infrastructure continued in the 1990s.
In 1991, it was publicly revealed that the DGSE intended to build a major
Sigint station in the Camargues region in Southern France, with planning
for the station having begun in 1987, was made public. In August 1991,
however, following pressure from both local politicians and
environmentalists, who claimed that wild Camargues ecosystem needed
protection, a court stopped the construction, and the project was finally
terminated in 1993.52 But four years later, the DGSE was allowed to set up
a 50-man new intercept station on the Plateau d’Albion in Haute-Provence,
which would monitor communications coming from Africa, together with a
60-man intercept station at Saint-Laurent-de-la-Salanque, in the East
Pyrenées.53
    Meanwhile, Silberzahn’s DGSE had to confront two major crises that
changed the face of the world, as well as the traditions of the global
intelligence community: the 1990 the invasion of Kuwait and the
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                            201
subsequent 1991 war against Iraq; and the same year the abortive coup
d’état in Moscow that signaled the end of the Soviet Union. The Gulf War
underlined for French intelligence officials US supremacy in the field of
technical intelligence. For instance, shortly after Operation ‘Desert Storm’
began in 1991, the senior US defense attaché in Paris, Admiral Philip Dur,
had an appointment with President Mitterrand to show him satellite pictures
of the area where the offensive was taking place. This was helpful but
humiliating for the French, since their Spot satellite was of little use in this
type of a large, high-intensity military environment because of its lack of
high-resolution capability. Besides, the French General Staff was always
wary of information that they could not confirm with their own technical
means and human intelligence sources. Some officials who happened to be
pro-Iraqi even feared that that the US would try to manipulate their allies.
    Yet the French played an important part in the overall Allied technical
reconnaissance effort. Some of the Spot imagery was used by the Pentagon
complementing the work of the US Keyhole imaging satellites, and the
magazine Armed Forces Journal International later acknowledged that
SPOT satellite imagery and photographs from the French F-1-CR Mirage
reconnaissance aircraft had been used to good effect.54 One of the French
Air Force’s new C-160G ‘Gabriel’ tactical Elint aircraft and the sole DC-8
‘Sarigue’ Sigint aircraft were sent to A1 Hasa Air Base in Saudi Arabia in
1990–91 to take part in Operation‘Desert Storm’. There they liased with the
GCR’s Djibouti intercept station, but operated under the command of the
CERM Special Electromagnetic Intelligence Cell.55 The spy ship Berry also
was sent to the Persian Gulf to monitor Iraqi communications.56
    The Gulf War had revealed major holes in France’s intelligence system.
The Socialist Defense Minister Pierre Joxe and his intelligence adviser,
General Philippe Rondot, a former SDECE officer who later attained world-
wide fame by kidnapping the terrorist Carlos in the Sudan and bringing him
to France for trial, decided to triple the size of the French military
intelligence system in order to cut France’s reliance on American technical
intelligence information.57
    One of the results of the war was that the military’s small intelligence
unit, the Military Intelligence Exploitation Center (CERM), then
commanded by Colonel Maurice Castagne, was deactivated and replaced
with a new and much larger military intelligence department, the Direction
du renseignement militaire (DRM). The DRM would have a large Sigint
capability, which would be augmented by the launch of the first French spy
satellite, Helios.58
    The former Director of Operations of the DGSE, General Jean Heinrich,
became the chief of the newly created DRM, which immediately started
recruiting some 300 intelligence specialists from the armed services and
202     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

universities. In April 1992, the DRM was activated with two headquarters,
one in Paris within the Chief of the General Staff‘s office, which handled
administration; and the other at Creil Air Base in the Oise region, where the
DRM’s technical and operations directorates were located.
    The DRM’s main operations center is at Creil Air Base, where the
following units are based: the Inter-service Helios Unit (Unité interarmées
Helios), which is in charge of exploiting imagery intelligence collected by
the Helios reconnaissance satellite; the Inter-service Imagery Interpretation
and Information Center (Centre de formation interarmées d‘interpretation
de l’imagerie, or CF3I); the Centre d’information sur les rayonnements
électromagnétique (CIREM), which processes and analyses Sigint; as well
as various military intelligence communications units. The DRM also drew
personnel and technical support from the Inter-service School for
Intelligence and Linguistic Skills (EIREL) in Strasbourg.59
    In 1995, General Heinrich was replaced as head of the DRM by General
Bruno Elie, who commanded the unit until 1998. As of 2000, the DRM,
which consisted of 1,710 military and civilian personnel, was headed by
Vice Admiral Yves de Kersauzon, who formerly was the French military
attaché in London. The DRM’s Technical Sub-Division (Sous-direction
Technique, or SDT), which supervises the command’s Sigint operations,
was commanded from 1992 until February 1999 by Geoffrey d’Aumale. His
replacement was Jacques Bongrand, a longtime aeronautical engineer and
former Defense Ministry official.60
    The DRM Technical Sub-Division worked closely with the Special
Electronic Warfare Center (Centre Electronique de l’Armement, or
CELAR) in the small town of Bruz, near the city of Rennes in Brittany.
CELAR, which is described as the French‘nerve center for digital warfare’,
consists of about 900 military technicians.61 The DRM’s Sigint intercept
resources have grown dramatically since the command’s formation in 1992.
    Most of the DRM’s Sigint intercepts come from 11 radio intercept
detachments deployed overseas, called Détachements avances des
transmissions (DAT), which are manned by some 300 personnel.62 In Africa,
two DATs are located in Djibouti and on La Reunion Island in the Indian
Ocean.63 In the late 1990s, the DRM built two new DAT intercept sites in
French Guyana in South America and on the island of New Caledonia in the
South Pacific.64
    Another modernisation program dealt with replacing the spy ship Berry
with a more modern vessel. In 1991, a new development project called
‘Berry-NG’ (Berry – New Generation) was initiated. It was decided within
the French intelligence community that by 1998, the Berry would be
replaced by a brand new surveillance ship, whose codename was‘Argos’.65
In 1999, after being modified for intelligence work in Brest, the new French
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                            203
 spy ship, the 4,870-ton Bougainville replaced the Berry as France’s primary
 sea-based intelligence collector. The Berry was decommissioned in May
 1999. Bougainville is now homeported at the Toulon naval base in the
Mediterranean. In the near future, Bougainville will set sail from Toulon on
its first operational Sigint collection mission off the North African coast.66
     As far as the public was aware, the Berry was officially the only spy ship
operated by the DGSE. But in fact, the DGSE secretly operated another spy
 ship, the 500-ton Isard, which had operated from 1978 onwards along the
African coast and in the Indian Ocean conducting Sigint collection as well
as clandestine operations in support of friendly African heads of state.67
    Also located at the Brest naval base was another French ship called the
Monge, under the command of Captain Gérard Etienne, which was not a spy
ship as such. Yet the 21,000-ton French Navy missile and space tracking
ship worked for the DGA and the DRM on scientific projects and performed
space-monitoring missions. For example, in March 1996 she received a
special mission: to calculate precisely the splashdown point in the South
Atlantic of the lost Chinese spy satellite‘Jianping’.68
    The French Navy’s nuclear-powered attack submarines also possessed a
limited Sigint collection capability. During the 1999 war in Kosovo, the
French attack submarine Amethyste was deployed off the Yugoslav port of
Kotor collecting intelligence on the activities of the Yugoslavian Navy.69
    In 1994, prior to the genocide that was to sweep Rwanda and result in
the murder of hundreds of thousands of people, the DGSE’s Bouar station
in the Central African Republic was able to intercept the communications of
the Rwandan Tutsi leader Paul Kagamé as he spoke over telephone circuits
carried by Inmarsat communications satellites.70 In 1997, French Sigint
pieced together information showing attacks by Tutsi supporters of the
future leader of Zaire, Laurent-Désirée Kabila, against Hutu refugees who
had come from Rwanda.71 However, the Bouar station was closed in 1997,
and the Djibouti base had to be beefed up in order to maintain adequate
Sigint coverage of Africa.72
    The DGSE’s Sigint efforts have become increasingly high-tech in the
last decade. Today, in the basement of the DGSE headquarters on the
Boulevard Mortier in Paris is a new Cray 1 supercomputer that is used to
process and analyse intercepts. Two computer systems, called ‘Taiga’ and
‘Noemia’ allow DGSE analysts to screen large numbers of intercepts for
intelligence comparable to NSA’s larger Echelon system. One intelligence
source has quoted the figure of 8,000 keywords being recorded in the
‘Noemia’ computer program, which involves ‘hacking’ into the computer
data systems of foreign companies.‘ T a i g a ’(Traitement Automatisé de
l’Information Géopolitique d’Actualité) was developed in 1987 by a
researcher named Christian Krumeich at the firm Thomson-CSF for the
204     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

DGSE, which initially provided essential computerised data on the former
USSR. The military intelligence organisation, the DRM, has also bought a
dozen Taiga’stations in order to further expand its Sigint effort.73
    An imagery reconnaissance satellite called Helios was developed by the
French defence contractor Matra, in conjunction with the Italian and
Spanish governments at a cost of FFr 9.6 billion. A ground station was
constructed at Torrejón Air Base, Spain to analyse the pictures taken by the
Helios satellite. In the summer of 1996, the DRM at Creil delivered the first
pictures from the Hélios-1-A satellite to the photo interpretation unit of the
Western European Union at Torrejón. After its launch in August 1995,
Helios was often used to provide imagery of military developments in
Bosnia.
    Helios also carried into orbit a Sigint intercept cartridge that allowed it
to intercept communications, as revealed by the French investigative
journalist Jean Guisnel.74 But the French kept the Sigint intercepts obtained
from the satellite for themselves and did not share them with their European
partners.75 Germany decided to withdraw from a program to develop and
build a second European spy satellite, called Helios-2, (the total cost of the
system was FFr 11.6 billion) after considerable pressure from the United
States, including a visit from CIA director John Deutch to dissuade German
Chancellor Helmuth Kohl from joining the program following the signing
of the French-German joint-development deal in the autumn of 1995.76
    Therefore, the French-German divorce in 1995 was an obvious setback.
It also financially weakened other French intelligence projects, such as the
Zenon Sigint satellite, which was then in the early stages of development.
And as a consequence, without telling the Italians and Spaniards, the French
place a Sigint cartridge built by Dassault on the satellite at a cost of FFr 1
billion.77 The irony was that during the Cold War, the US and French
intelligence services collaborated in the fight against the Soviet Union. But
as soon as the Cold War was over, France turned its Sigint collection system
against its former partners.
    In a separate program, a special agreement was struck between the
German BND and the DGSE on a Sigint exchange program. Under the aegis
of the DGSE, the two intelligence organisations agreed to intercept
communications traffic being relayed through civilian communications
satellites in orbit over American territory.78 All of these new developments
allowed the DGSE and the DRM to offer a response and a viable alternative
to the Anglo-American UKUSA global spying programs, such as Echelon.
A good example was given when it was revealed that the in 1993, the
French had intercepted the communications of a US ambassador aboard a
C-141 Globemaster military transport plane as it flew over the Russian
province of Nagorno-Karabakh.79
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                                           205

    It was not the first time that the Anglo-Saxon Sigint community was
forced to realise that the Cold War was really over, and that ‘friendly spies’
were quite active in a field, which until then had been publicly described as
their main speciality. At least they, unlike the public, knew that the French
had managed in the last ten years to develop a widespread and effective
Sigint system that could compete with their former allies and play a leading
role in the building of a European intelligence community.80


                                          NOTES

 1. The author published extracts of these intercepts in Roger Faligot, Naisho, enquête au cœur
    des services secrets japonais (Paris: La Découverte 1998). He was given access to them
    thanks to Colonel Cattiew, former chief of the SCSSI, who among other contributions
    published a‘Rétrospective de la cryptologie de 1928 à nos jours’, published in bulletin No.
    26 (1998/1999) of the Association des Réservistes du Chiffre et de la Sécurité de
    l’Information (ARCSI– Association of Cipher and Information Security Veterans).
 2. In her book La France gagne la guerre des codes secrets, 1914–1918 (Paris: Tallandier
    1998), Sophie de Lastours describes, thanks to the long-overdue opening of the archives, the
    successes of French cipher specialists during World War I, such as Generals François Cartier
    and Maurice Givierge, as well the brilliant cryptanalyst Georges Painvin, who broke the
    famous‘Victory radiogramme’code, which allowed the Allies to defeat the last German
    offensive in 1918. When Ms de Lastours published her well-researched book, many in the
    international Sigint community demonstrated great interest, and NSA and GCHQ, both of
    whom are always interested in solving historical enigmas, ordered dozens of copies of the
    book.
 3. In 1932, Joseph Ducroux, a French Comintern agent, was sent in Asia to find Cremet, who
    had vanished the previous year while smuggling arms to Deng Xiaoping’s guerrillas in
    Guangxi Province in southern China. An opponent of Stalin, he faked his own death and
    subsequently lived under an assumed name in Belgium. For his part, Ducroux was arrested
    by British police in Singapore. Some messages in his possession were deciphered, and as a
    result the whole Shanghai network was dismantled and Sorge narrowly escaped arrest. In
    Hong Kong however, the leader of the Vietnamese revolution, Ho Chi Minh, was arrested as
    a result. All of these men, Cremet, Sorge, Ducroux, and Pan Hannian had been trained at the
    OMS Mount Lenin School, near Moscow, where clandestine cipher and radio techniques
    were taught. Interview with the Ducroux and Cremet families, 1988. See also Roger Faligot
    and Rémi Kauffer, The Chinese Secret Service (London: Headline 1989) and As-tu vu
    Cremet? (Paris: Fayard 1991).
 4. For a more detailed discussion of the history of the DST and its predecessors, see Roger
    Faligot and Pascal Krop, DST, Police secrète (Paris: Flammarion 1999).
 5. The best description of French Sigint following the fall of France is Martin Thomas,‘Signals
    Intelligence and Vichy France, 1940–1944’, Intelligence and National Security 14/1 (Spring
    1999) pp. 176–200.
 6. Interview with Marie-Madeleine Fourcade, 13 Feb. 1988.
 7. A colorful history of Bertrand’s cryptologic work during World War II can be found in his
    memoirs, Gustave Bertrand, Enigma ou la plus grande énigme de la guerre 1939–1945
    (Paris: Editions Plon 1973).
 8. Col. A. de Dainville, L’ ORA, la résistance de l’ armée/guerre 39–45 (Paris: Ed.Lavauzelle
     1974). See also on Romon, Revue des Transmissions, Oct. 1946.
 9. Confidential interview.
10. Written communication with the author from Maurice Vial, who was the French
    counterintelligence case officer of Mohammedi Saïd in Algeria, 22 Feb. 2000. See also on
    the North African nationalists’alliance with the Nazis: Roger Faligot and Rémi Kauffer, Le
206       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

      Croissant et la Croix Gammée: Les secrets de l’alliance entre l’islam et le nazisme d’Hitler
      à nos jours (Paris: Albin Michel 1990).
 11. Interview, Stasia O’Neill, April 1984. Ms O’Neill, who lived in Lyon, remained a staunch
      supporter of the Irish Republican cause until she died in 1998.
 12. Interview with John Bruce Lockhart, former MI6 station chief in Paris.
 13. Interview with Col. Paul Arnaud, 13 Nov. 1986.
 14. Reinhard Gehlen, The Service: The Memoirs of General Reinhard Gehlen (London: Collins
      1972) p.258.
 15. Interview with former SDECE officer Marcel Chaussée, 18 July 1984, and confidential
     interviews. This story is still controversial in France since Black was considered a good
     cryptologist. For instance, a French cipher specialist, engineer Charles Eyraud later thanked
     Lt. Col. Black for his help while writing his book Précis de Cryptographie moderne (Paris:
     Editions Raoul Tari 1953).
 16. The sports journalist André Passevant, who later worked for the Communist daily newspaper
     L’Humanité,recalled in his memoirs how he was trained as an intercept operator at Hauterive
     in 1946. Hereafter he was then was sent to the 8th Transmission Regiment to help set up a
     GCR intercept station in New Caledonia in the Pacific, which was commanded by a French
     resistance hero, Captain Delhommelle. André Passevant, Même si ça dérange (Paris: Robert
     Laffont 1976).
 17. Aux écoutes, No. 1.264, 15 Oct. 1948.
18. European Security and Police Organisations, 15 Oct. 1947, RG-38, Translations of
     Intercepted Enemy Radio Traffic, 1940–1946, Box 2740, US National Archives, College
     Park, Maryland.
19. The French Union then included France’s colonies in Asia and Africa. Financial Report on
     the SDECE by M. Guy Petit, French National Assembly, 12 May 1950.
20. Conversation with Joël Le Tac, former BCRA operative, then SDECE officer, and later a
     French member of Parliament. See Franck Renaud, Le Breton de Montmartre (Rennes:
     Editions Ouest France 1994).
21. Nicolas Fournier and Edmond Legrand, Dossier E... Comme Espionnage (Paris: Editions
     Alain Moreau 1978), and communication from Dr Erich Schmidt-Eenboom (see his
     contribution in this work on German Sigint).
22. Faligot and Krop, DST (note 4); Interview with Auguste Lecœur in 1984.
23. Douglas Porch, The French Secret Services (NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux 1995) pp.299,
     313–14; John Prados, The Hidden History of the Vietnam War (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee 1995)
     p.193 and Alexander Zervoudakis,‘Nihil Mirare, Nihil Contemptare, Omni Intelligere:
     Franco-Vietnamese Intelligence in Indochina, 1950–1954’, Intelligence and National
     Security 13/1 (Spring 1998) pp.203–5.
24. David Donald, Spyplane (Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International 1987) p.53; Col. Alfred F.
     Hurley, Project CHECO Report: The EC-47 in Southeast Asia, 20 Sept. 1968, p.2, Air Force
     Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, Alabama; MS, US Army Security Agency,
     ARDF in Vietnam, 1962–1972, p.31, via Matthew M. Aid.
25. Interview with General Belleux, 12 July 1984.
26. See Roger Faligot and Pascal Krop, La Piscine: The French Secret Service Since 1944
     (London: Basil Blackwell 1989) p.89. Raoul Salan had been an intelligence specialist in Asia
     before World War II as head of the Service de Renseignement Intercolonial (SRI).
27. Unpublished MS, Roger Faligot, Biographical Dictionary of Chinese Intelligence Operatives.
28. John D. Bergen, Military Communications: A Test for Technology (Washington DC: US
     Army Center for Military History 1986) p.20; US Army Security Agency, When The Tiger
     Stalks No More: The Vietnamization of Sigint: May 1961– June 1970, p.1, NSA FOIA, via
     Matthew M. Aid.
29. Constantin Melnik, Services‘très’ secrets (Paris: Editions de Fallois 1989).
30. Interview with Jean Allemand, alias Col. Germain, in 1984. Allemand died in 1994. See also
     Roger Faligot,‘Comment le colonel Germain a enlevé Ben Bella’, Historia, No. 573, Sept.
     1994.
31. Faligot and Krop, DST (note 4).
32. Bernard Chantebout, L’ organisation générale de la défense nationale en France depuis la
FRANCE, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                                            207
    fin de la seconde guerre mondiale, Librairie général de Droit et Jurisprudence (Paris: R.
     Pichon & R. Durand-Auzias 1967).
33. Melnik, Services‘très’ secrets (note 29).
34. Faligot and Krop, La Piscine (note 26) pp.210–29; Interviews with Colonels Hounau,
     Lannurien and Delseny, all of whom were SDECE department heads in the mid-1960s.
35. Interview with Alexandre de Marenches.
36. Paris-Match, 30 June 1973.
37. Faligot and Krop, La Piscine (note 26) pp.254–55.
38. Le Monde, 24 Feb. 1978.
39. Confidential source.
40. Interview with the author. See also, Roger Faligot and Rémi Kauffer, Les maîtres espions,
     Histoire mondiale du renseignement (World Intelligence History, Vol. 2, foreword by
     Alexandre de Marenches) (Paris: Robert Laffont 1994).
41. Interférences No. 3, Autumn 1975.
42. The author knows the location of this station, but because of the current wave of Breton
     nationalist bomb attacks on French government targets in Brittany, the author has chosen not
     to reveal its location here.
43. Henri Serres later worked for Matra, the French affiliate of Computer Sciences Corporation,
     and in March 2000 he became the head of information systems security within the Prime
     Minister’s office, the Secrétariat général de la défense nationale (SGDN).
44. Confidential source who participated in the operations.
45. Donald, Spyplane (note 24) pp.87–8; ‘Les avions-espions francais Gabriel et Sarigue’, Air &
     Cosmos/Aviation International, No. 1460, 21–27 Feb. 1994, p.26.
46. Donald, Spyplane (note 24) p.88; Paul A. Jackson, French Military Aviation (Earl Shilton:
     Midland County Publications 1979) p.53.
47. Paul Michaud,‘New French Spy Ship’, Defence, March 1991, p.10.
48. For details on these French special intelligence units see Jean-Jacques Cécile, Le
     renseignement français à l’aube du XXIe siècle (Paris: Editions Charles-Lavauzelle 1998).
49. Michael Wines,‘French Said to Spy on OU Computer Companies’, New York Times, 18 Nov.
      1990. Jean Lesieur,‘ L e scandale des espions français’, L’Express, 25 May 1990. See Peter
     Schweizer, Friendly Spies (NY: Atlantic Monthly Press 1993). The author of this book
     reveals, among other things, that in the economic war, GCR facilities at Mont Valérien
     ‘began intercepting commercial traffic between German companies’ in 1967 (p. 103).
50. Le Monde, 13 March 1993.
51. Claude Silberzahn and Jean Guisnel, Au cœur du secret, 1500 jours aux commandes de la
     DGSE, 1988–1993 (Paris: Fayard 1995).
52. Jean Guisnel,‘DGSE: chantier secret-beton en Camargue’, Liberation, 12 July 1991;‘ L a
     DGSE agrandit ses antennas en pleine Camargue’, Le Monde, 13 July 1991.
53. Jacques Isnard,‘La DGSE installera un center d’ecoute sue le plateau d’Albion’, Le Monde,
     9 May 1997.
54. Jean-Paul Dufour,‘ L e satellite français Spot a guidé les raids américains dans le Golfe’, Le
     Monde, 26 May 1991.
55. Jeffrey M. Lenorovitz, ‘France Uses C-160G Aircraft to Perform Elint, ESM Missions’
     Aviation Week & Space Technology, 21 Jan. 1991, p.62.
56. Michaud,‘New French Spy Ship’(note 47).
57. Percy Kemp,‘The Fall and Rise of France’s Spymasters’, Intelligence and National Security
     9/1 (Jan. 1994) p.16.
58. Jean Guisnel and Bernard Violet, Services secrets: Le pouvoir et les services de
     renseignements sous François Mitterrand (Paris: La Découverte 1988).
59. Kemp,‘The Fall and Rise of France’s Spymasters’(note 57) p.15.
60. ‘France: Jacques Bongrand’, Intelligence Newsletter, 25 Feb. 1999.
61. Roger Faligot,‘Inside the nerve centre for digital warfare’, The European, 28 Nov. 1996. See
     also Jean Guisnel, Cyberwars: Espionage on the Internet (NY: Plenum Trade 1997).
62. Senat, Project de loi de finances pour 2000, Tome IV– Defence, Section II. Le
     Renseignement: Une amélioration des moyens qui doit être renforcée.
63. Confidential source.
208       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

64. Senat, Avis No. 88– Tome IV– Project de loi de finances pour 1998, Section B: Les moyens
     des differents services de renseignement; Senat, Project de loi de finances pour 1999, Section
     B: Les moyens des differents services de renseignement; Senat, Project de loi de finances
     pour 2000, Tome IV– Defence, Section II. Le Renseignement: Une amélioration des moyens
     qui doit être renforcée.
65. Confidential naval information.
66. Jacques Isnard,‘Bougainville and its Big Ears Sail, Destination Unknown’, Le Monde, 10
     May 2000.
67. Confidential source. See also Jacques Isnard,‘ L a France admet officiellement l’existence
     d’un second bateau-espion au service de DGSE’, Le Monde, 5 Jan. 1994.
68. Télégramme de Brest, 18 Sept. 1997.
69. Jacques Isnard, ‘NATO Denies Keeping France in the Dark’, Le Monde, 11 April 1999; idem,
     ‘Franco-US Naval Battle During Kosovo War’, Le Monde, 5 Jan. 2000.
70. Guisnel (note 61).
71. Confidential source.
72. Guisnel (note 61).
73. Ibid.; Alain Joannes,‘Dossier. Les nouveaux agents secrets de l’economie’, Le Télégramme,
     19 Aug. 1999.
74. Jean Guisnel, Les pires amis du monde: Les relations franco-américaines à la fin du XXè
     siècle (Paris: Stock 1999).
75. The head of the DRM, Admiral de Kersauzon, acknowledged in a press interview that the
     tension between France and its partners reached the stage where the DRM refused to provide
     the Germans with imagery of Kosovo and the Yugoslav Federation during the 1999 NATO
     operations in Kosovo. See,‘We do not show our pictures to our German allies’, Liberation,
     3 Dec. 1999.
76. John Fitchett,‘Help With a Spy Satellite: Germany Poised to Join French Project’, The
     International Herald Tribune, 19 Oct. 1995.
77. Le Monde du renseignement/The Intelligence Newsletter, Paris, 30 March 1995. Website:
     www.intelligenceOnline.com.
78. Jean Guisnel,‘Espionnage: les français aussi écoutent leurs alliés’, Le Point, 19 June 1998.
79. Guisnel, Les pires amis du monde (note 74).
80. Ibid.
                                      7
      Scandinavia, Sigint and the Cold War

                        ALF R. JACOBSEN




One brief look at the map of Scandinavia will immediately make clear why
the Nordic countries during the Cold War became of increasing importance
to Signals Intelligence, and why in certain areas, it was at the really sharp
end of the business. Finland, Sweden, Norway and to a lesser extent
Denmark are all tucked away in the far north-eastern corner of Europe,
leaning against the former Soviet Union from Leningrad (now St
Petersburg) in the south to Murmansk in the north– Finland and Norway
sharing a thousand-mile-long common border with the Russian superpower.
The importance of Scandinavia to Signals Intelligence therefore was, and
still is, a function of geography.
     Norway and in particular Finland, but also Sweden sat ringside to many
of the main events, and indeed to the main enemy during the Cold War.
Proximity to the Soviet Union transformed the Nordic countries into
excellent platforms for the collection of intelligence about the Soviet
military machine. This of course became even more acute as the Cold War
heated up during the 1970s and 1980s and the Kola Peninsula was turned
into one of the largest military bases in the world. It was home of the huge
Northern Fleet with its surface ships and nuclear submarines. The large
island of Novaya Zemlya, the White Sea and the eastern parts of the Barents
Sea became the main testing ground for new Soviet weaponry, especially
Submarine Launched Ballistic Missiles (SLBMs) and cruise missiles.
     The odds seemed overwhelming. Among the forces confronting the
Nordic countries in north-western Russia, one had the forward elements of
the Sixth Army with headquarters in Petrosavodsk outside Leningrad,
including one infantry division and numerous Army and Navy assault
brigades and amphibious forces spread across the territory.
     On the Kola Peninsula itself more than 20 airfields with hundreds of
bombers, helicopters and fighters lay within striking distance of the borders.
210     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Along the coast, stretching from Gremikha in the east to Zapadnaya Litsa in
the west, was the enormous Northern Fleet base complex growing.
Hundreds of ships, including the Kiev-class carriers, the Kirov-class
battlecruisers and the feared‘ T y p h o o n ’and‘ D e l t a ’-class rocket-firing
nuclear submarines were at its centre, constituting the main Soviet
submarine strategic deterrent.
    Further to the east lay the White Sea and Archangel area with its Red
Navy shipyards, the Nenoksa naval missile testing range and to the south of
Archangel, the Plesetsk space centre, from where Intercontinental Ballistic
Missiles (ICBMs) were test fired across the Soviet continent and into the
Pacific.
    Further to the south lay Leningrad with the Baltic Fleet and the whole
Western theatre stretching through the Baltic States, Poland and East
Germany right down to the Wall. One enormous military camp with its
guards armies, its air fleets and its missiles ready to strike. It was a
formidable and fearsome arsenal only minutes away from the Scandinavian
countries, the nightmare scenario being a swift attack cutting off northern
Norway in the north and sealing off the Danish straits in the south in the
opening stages of a conflict.

A B A L A N C I N G ACT

As border states, squeezed between the two superpowers, the United States
in the west and the USSR Evil Empire in the East, the Scandinavian
countries had to conduct a very careful balancing act. On the one hand doing
their outmost not to provoke the Soviet giant and on the other hand always
sweeten and flatter Whitehall and Washington, which in the end provided
the only guaranty of security. This policy was expressed in the Norwegian
‘base declarations’ and the Swedish concept of neutrality.1 As one element
of this balancing act, it was important to keep the big powers out of the
border regions. In particular was this the case as regards their intelligence
services, which were perceived as gung-go and trigger-happy without any
deeper understanding of local affairs. To keep them out, and at the same
time keep the Allies in, the Nordic intelligence services had to do the job
themselves and to prove that they could deliver the stuff the Americans and
others wanted. The Scandinavian countries had to build up big and
technologically-advanced intelligence services but that could only be done
with access to US hi-tech and US dollars.
    It is therefore fair to say that the Nordic countries, with the exception of
Finland and to some extent Sweden, more or less became American client
states in the field of intelligence, large scale purveyors of intelligence raw
materials. In exchange they would be placed under the US atomic umbrella
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                        211
and receive huge and secret transfers of equipment and money. In this
respect one may for example argue that the secret daily stream of
intelligence data across the Atlantic from Northern Norway alone was one
of Norway’s main export articles during the Cold War, and also a
considerable earner of much needed foreign exchange, millions of dollars
being put into the secret accounts of the Defence Intelligence Staff in the
Bank of Norway.
    Today, Scandinavia’s old and longsuffering neighbour Russia is down on
her knees, her immense resources having been sold off at give-away prices
to her new gangster elite, a tragedy which to some extent happened on the
basis of advice by Wall Street. Accordingly the United States has lost much
of her interest in the intelligence data she once got from Scandinavia. This
raises another question of even greater importance to small nations. To what
extent are the Nordic countries now able to conduct their own independent
foreign policy, based on sound and high quality political and military
information from their intelligence services, when these services have less
to offer the US, and therefore, one may suspect, not any longer get back the
intelligence from other and more important areas of the world which they
used to do?

SOURCES

I am a writer, not a historian. Although an investigative journalist applies
more or less the same methods as a historian, I shall in this contribution
approach my theme with the liberty of a contemporary journalist. For one
reason mainly: much of what we know, especially from later years, are
learnt from oral sources; officers and politicians who are still bound by strict
secrecy laws, and whose identities therefore cannot be revealed. This again
means that what they say cannot be properly tested against written sources.
I will also dwell mostly on developments in Norway, which I know best,
and where a number of historians and parliamentary investigators have been
given access to the officers and archives of the Defence Intelligence Staff.2
It is fair to assume that Signals Intelligence in Scandinavia more or less
developed along similar lines, with Finland forced to downplay her role due
to her closeness to Russia, and Denmark playing a somewhat different role
because of her closeness to Germany and Poland.

THE ROOTS

The 1920s and 1930s saw an awakening in Scandinavia to the possibilities
and dangers of the telegraph and the radio. As news spread about the success
of Sigint during World War I, in which the Nordic countries remained on the
212    SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

sidelines, a new consciousness developed among scientists, military officers
and diplomats as to the need for secure communications. The pioneers were
greatly inspired by Herbert Yardley’s book The American Black Chamber.
This book was followed in 1931 in Sweden by a similar study, The
Contributions of the Cryptographic Bureaus in the World War, written by the
hot-tempered and multi-lingual French/Swedish businessman Yves Gyldén
whose other great interest was rugby.3
    In neighbouring Norway, which was a young nation, having only gained
independence from Sweden in 1905, all communications were enciphered
by an instrument, invented by a Norwegian painter in 1883, called
Strømdahl’s cryptograph. Absolutely secure, said the inventor. However,
anyone with an interest in cryptography could read the supposedly secret
traffic on military and diplomatic channels, without any problem, because
this cryptograph was based on the Vigenére cipher, which already had been
known for 500 years.
    The first man who understood the precarious nature of Norwegian
ciphers was a young artillery captain and economist, Alfred Roscher Lund,
who must be regarded as the father of Norwegian Signals Intelligence. On
his initiative a secret cipher committee was set up in 1935 to establish
secure communications and, as the other side of the coin, to explore how the
communications of other countries could be intercepted and attacked by
cryptanalysis. In fact, one can date the birth of Norwegian Signals
Intelligence to Saturday 23 November 1935, when a rather pedantic story
appeared in a popular evening paper, inviting readers to solve a number of
puzzles. The main one was the title, where the words‘Secret writing’were
hidden in a simple transposition cipher. Roscher Lund wrote the article, but
not as entertainment for the readers. It was the first conscious effort to
recruit puzzle solvers to his new‘Black Chamber’, which he tried to
establish with a government grant of only 200 dollars. By getting access to
the addresses of the people who sent their solutions to the paper, Roscher
Lund found 22 recruits who became the first members of his new
Cryptology Club.4
    Roscher Lund got his inspiration from Sweden where two eccentric
brothers, Arvid and Ivar Damm, in 1915 set up the company Cryptograph
Limited with financial support from Olof Gyldén, head of the Swedish
Naval Academy and Yves Gyldén’s father. In 1919 Arvid Damm invented
the rotor wheel, essential to the new generation of electromechanical cipher
machines, at about the same time as Koch in Holland, Hebern in America
and Scherbius in Germany.5
    The brothers were true enthusiasts. The last word Ivar, a teacher in
mathematics, uttered on his deathbed was‘crypto’. Arvid reached his high
point as a womaniser when he staged a fake wedding with a fake priest in a
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      213
rented church only to be able to bed a Hungarian circus princess he had
pursued since their first meeting in Helsinki. His money-making abilities
did not match his passion for beautiful women and in 1921 his company had
to be saved from bankruptcy by money from the famous Nobel family who
had returned to Sweden after the Bolshevik revolution with a fortune from
the Baku oilfields.
    When the Nobels grew tired of waiting for a return on their investment,
one of their employees, Boris Hagelin, born in Russia of Swedish parents,
took over. Hagelin turned the company’s fortunes around when he, in the
1930s, put a developed version of Damm’s invention into mass production.
Among Hagelin’s first customers in this early period were the Nordic
countries. He eventually sold 140,000 cipher machines, model Hagelin M-
209, to the US Signals Corps during World War II and thus became a very
rich man. While Damm and most of the other geniuses of Scandinavian
Sigint died in relative poverty, Hagelin in 1952, to avoid the punitive taxes
and regulations of the new Swedish welfare state, took his company from
Sweden to tax-free Switzerland. There it became the Crypto AG, in later
years a world renowned producer of modern cipher machines selling
different models of the old Swedish invention to 120 countries world-wide.

F I R S T ATTEMPTS

The scientific development spearheaded by Damm, Gyldén, Hagelin and
others, plus the various attempts by the Swedish Armed Forces to collect
signals intelligence from naval vessels in the Baltic Sea, led in July 1937 to
the establishment of the Signals Intelligence Department of the Swedish
Defence Staff, from 1942 until today known as the Defence Radio Institute
(Försvarets Radioanstalt, FRA). In fact many of the mathematicians and
officers who started with Sigint in 1937, could be found on the FRA payroll
up until the 1970s, giving Sweden a unique tradition through World War II
and most of the Cold War.
    Roscher Lund became a personal friend of Hagelin and other Swedes
and tried to copy their achievements when he finally, in September 1939,
pushed by the outbreak of war, managed to persuade the Norwegian Labour
government to put up 10,000 US dollars to finance the first Norwegian
Black Chamber, camouflaged as the Information Office of the Department
of Defence.
    Twelve years earlier, on 18 June 1927, the Finnish Army had established
its own radio intelligence service, headed by the gifted and ruthless Reino
Hallamaa who had fought on the White side against the Bolsheviks in the
civil war that followed Finland’s declaration of independence from Russia
in 1918. With help from Germany, Poland and Estonia, Hallarna slowly
214     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

built the small‘Statistical Office’of the General Staff into Scandinavia’s
most advanced Sigint service with listening posts and a highly qualified
staff of cryptanalysts, among them the former head of Estonian Sigint, the
brilliant Andres Kalmus, and the equally brilliant Russian linguist and
actuary, Erkki Pale, who was recruited in late 1939 and led the attack on
Soviet military systems.6
    Despite a shortage of resources, Scandinavian Sigint had significant
success in this early period. Both the Finns and the Swedes became experts
in solving Soviet two to five digit additive codes. The Swedish mathematical
genius, Arne Beurling, and his partner, the multi-talented Åke Lundquist,
later Grand Master of chess, acknowledged botanist and translator of
German classical poetry, and their associates among the cryptanalysts,
solved the Soviet Baltic Fleet code, various Soviet Army and Air Force
codes, before their wartime efforts culminated in the solution of the German
Geheimschreiber, a cipher machine with the complexity of Enigma.7
    From 1940 to 1943 the FRA intercepted and read tens of thousands of
German military and diplomatic messages, passing through Stockholm on
landlines from Oslo and Helsinki to the Nazi High Command in Berlin,
thereby giving the Swedish government nearly complete insight into the
German dispositions in occupied Norway and along the Murmansk front,
where German and Finnish troops fought their common Soviet enemy.
    To a certain extent information about codebreaking was exchanged on
an informal basis between Stockholm, Hallarna’s battlehardened veterans in
Finland and Roscher Lund’s recruits in Norway.8 The Finns, who shared a
long and bloody history with both Sweden and Russia, were the undisputed
frontrunners, mastering a number of Soviet ciphers, which greatly helped
them during the heroic struggles of the first Winter War, from November
1939 to March 1940.
    They continued their efforts when Finland joined forces with Nazi
Germany in its attack against the Soviet Union in June 1941, and a
significant number of German and Finnish cryptanalysts worked together
on the Murmansk front. Through the pioneering work on the Abwehr by the
Norwegian historian, Tore Pryser, we also know more about how the
Germans and the Finns got their hands on the famous Petsamo codebooks.9
It has been widely believed that one partially burnt codebook was taken by
the Finns. The truth seems to be that a platoon of German Abwehr troops,
supported by Norwegian Nazi collaborators, in the early morning hours of
22 June 1941 staged a surprise attack across the Norwegian border on the
Soviet consulate in Petsamo where they successfully captured the Soviet
codes. The resulting information was shared with the Finns, and also Japan,
and later became passports to freedom for the German and Finnish experts
who had been on the wrong side in the war.
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                     215
    Indeed, the wartime telegrams exchanged between Tokyo and its envoys
in Berlin and Helsinki, discussing the combined Axis success against Soviet
ciphers, were intercepted and read by the codebreakers in Washington and
seem to have inspired the US Venona effort in 1943. There is therefore a
clear connection between the early work of the Nordic codebreakers in the
frozen wastelands of the Arctic and one of the deepest Allied secrets of the
Cold War.10
    In Norway Roscher Lund’s Black Chamber existed for only six months,
as he and his codebreakers were forced to evacuate Oslo and burn their
archives when Hitler’s Germany attacked out of the blue in the early
morning hours of 9 April 1940, having occupied Denmark earlier that same
night. During those six months Roscher Lund’s small staff had concentrated
on German and British ciphers with surprising success in one field. Through
traffic analysis and codebreaking they had helped to unmask practically the
whole Abwehr spy network along the Norwegian coast. Most of the radio
agents were just about to be arrested by the Norwegian police when they
were saved by the German occupation. Lund fought alongside the
Norwegian and Allied forces as they retreated northwards during April and
May until Norway, on 10 June 1940, surrendered after the Allied troops
withdrew in an desperate attempt to stop the German advance through the
Low Countries and France. That same day Lund and two of his men skied
across the border to neutral Sweden, having been ordered to continue their
work in Stockholm. In 1942 he became head of a new Military Intelligence
Staff set up in London by the Norwegian government-in-exile, equipped
and trained by MI6 and MI5.11


THE WAR ENDS

This brief sketch of the history of Scandinavian Sigint was necessary for
these early years are important in understanding the post-war developments
in Signals Intelligence. Finnish Sigint had been, from a technical viewpoint,
a success, but at least doubtful politically. Much more needs to be done by
historians to assess the effect the combined German/Finnish codebreaking
on the Northern Front had on Allied shipping losses in the Barents Sea, for
example. We know that Soviet coded messages, from aeroplanes and ships
sent out to meet and protect Allied convoys, were intercepted and broken.
They were then transmitted on landlines through Sweden to the Nazi
commands in Berlin and occupied Norway from where submarines, surface
ships and planes were directed against the convoys. The Swedes of course
knew, because they read the teleprinter traffic.12
    When the Murmansk front broke in October 1944, the Finns surrendered
while the Germans applied scorched earth tactics as they withdrew through
216     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Northern Norway. More than 50,000 people were driven from their homes;
every single building in an area the size of Denmark burnt down. In the
autumn of 1944, in order to escape the wrath of the Soviets, 350 Finnish
Sigint staff members escaped into Sweden with their immediate families,
and with 700 cases of crypto equipment in the well known Operation‘Stella
Polaris’. Copies of the materials seem later to have been sold off to Sweden,
France, Britain and the United States. About 15 of the codebreakers were
employed by Sweden’s FRA, while the anti-Soviet head of Finnish Army
Intelligence, Colonel Aladar Paasonen, Hallarna, Kalmus and several others
sought their post-war fortunes in France and elsewhere. The rest of them
eventually went back home to Finland, a few to face prison sentences,
among them Erkki Pale, while others later rebuilt modern Finnish Sigint of
which, so far, little has been revealed.13
    It is less well known that the German partners of Finnish Sigint,
organised in the so-called‘Meldekopf Nordland’, retreated to southern
Norway, where they surrendered in May 1945. The remaining group of 36
German codebreakers, well aware of the value of their knowledge of Soviet
ciphers, crossed the border with their archives and offered their services to
Sweden. However the Swedish government, already embarrassed by the
influx of the Finnish‘stellists’, and with the victorious Soviet Union closely
watching their actions, turned them down and put them on a plane to
Germany, where they were welcomed by the American Office at Strategic
Services (OSS), in Wiesbaden in June 1945.14

WAR L E S S O N S

All the Nordic countries had learnt bitter lessons from the war. Once the
immediate post-war jubilation had died down and the Cold War started, one
thing seemed quite clear: if the small democracies facing the Soviet military
colossus were to survive, they needed their own professional intelligence
services. The elite, which had started cryptanalysis before the war, also
realised that such new and better services needed to incorporate Sigint as the
vital element.
    In Denmark and Norway people said:‘Never again the ninth of April.
Next time we’ll be better prepared.’Both countries had been occupied by
Nazi Germany for five years, but the situation was slightly different. In
Denmark the King and the government had stayed on, for three years
walking the difficult path of collaboration with the German occupiers, even
signing the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1941. In occupied Copenhagen the pre-
war Army and Navy Intelligence Staffs, led by Lieutenant Colonel Einar
Nordentoft, continued to function as did the other state institutions until the
crisis of August 1943, when the Nazi German plenipotentiary, Dr Werner
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      217
Best, tightened the screw and demanded tougher measures against the rising
number of protest strikes and Resistance-led sabotage actions. Mass
demonstrations followed and, on 29 August, both the government and the
parliament stood down after having rejected Best’s demands. The Nazi
answer came swiftly. German troops attacked the Danish Army barracks.
Fighting broke out, and the Danish Navy scuttled its ships. During the
following state-of-emergency, the Danish King and the Crown Prince were
interned as prisoners of war, while the running of the country was left to
civil servants. The Resistance movement, being directed from neutral
Stockholm, grew to a well-armed underground army of nearly 50,000
women and men, and put up, for the remaining 21 months of the war, a
brave and vigorous struggle against the increasing Nazi terror.
    On that fateful 29 August 1943, the Danish intelligence headquarters in
Copenhagen closed down. Nordentoft escaped to Stockholm with his right-
hand man, Navy Commander Poul Adam Mørk, head of the Naval Section
since 1932. The third main character, Army Colonel Hans Lunding, was
arrested by the Gestapo, transported to Berlin and sentenced to death by a
Nazi court after several months of hunger and harassment. He spent the last
year of the war in the Flossenbürg concentration camp near Munich, waiting
for the sentence to be carried out. In his next-door death-cell, the legendary
former chief of the Abwehr, Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, was held, having
been arrested and tortured as one of the officers responsible for the failed
attempt to kill Hitler on 20 July 1944. By exchanging signals through the
wall, the Danish Army intelligence colonel was the last man to have contact
with the German intelligence maestro. For Lunding, having to witness so
many executions, the feared nightly knock-on-the door never came. When
the Germans surrendered, he was still waiting. Two months later, in July
1945, he was able to return to Denmark as a free man.15


THE NAVAL RADIO SERVICE

In 1946, Lieutenant Colonel Nordentoft and Commander Mørk, having run
Danish intelligence successfully from exile in Stockholm, entered into
negotiations with the British and the Americans to secure funding and
technical assistance for new and more efficient intelligence services. The
visionary Mørk soon became the driving force behind the Danish Navy’s
first systematic attempts to collect Sigint. He had in the 1930s built up a
highly successful shipwatching system in the Baltics and the Danish straits,
based on a network of contacts among Danish shipowners, harbour masters,
merchant marine captains, shipbrokers, shipping agents and fishermen. In
his book, The Colonel and the Commander, the Danish historian, Wilhelm
Christmas-Møller, writes this:
218     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

      Over all Denmark’s position, at the entrance to the Baltic Sea, was and
      still is the main reason behind the Danish intelligence services’ability
      to deliver genuine products of interest to others...the Straits have
      always had their strategic importance, and Denmark has been
      especially well suited to survey, if not control, the traffic passing in
      and out of the Baltic ...Mørk’s maritime network was re-built after
      WW2, and became, from the end of the 1940s, a vital part of what
      Danish intelligence had to offer its partners abroad.16
    Indeed, shipping intelligence, expanded to cover the seven seas as the
Danish merchant marine fleet grew, has until today been a major product of
Danish intelligence. When the United States, Great Britain and their
UKUSA partners in the 1950s established their huge and world-wide
program to monitor Soviet and Eastern Bloc merchant ship movements, the
Joint Naval Intelligence Collection Organisation (JNICO), Denmark
became a key member, alongside Norway, Holland, Sweden and other
seafaring nations.17 The shipping intelligence Mørk could produce and
information from the Danish possession of Greenland seem to have been
important when he secured from the Americans in 1947 the first deliveries
of radio equipment for his brainchild, the new Naval Radio Service
(Søværnets Radiotjeneste, SR). This service became the foundations upon
which modern Danish Sigint would rest, and also worked with captured
direction-finding equipment from the huge Comint intercept station the
Germans had run in the north of Jutland during the war. When Mørk many
years later briefed Christmas-Møller, he was‘visibly proud’when he told
him how he had been able to develop Danish Sigint on financial
contributions from outside ordinary budgets, and on‘donations from the
Americans’.


THE VILLA

Since just before the war, the Danish Navy had been intercepting German
naval radio traffic and made limited efforts at codebreaking. The small
codebreaking unit was re-established in 1946 under Lieutenant Commander
Finn Haugsted who again reported to Commander Mørk. Two years later, in
the spring of 1948, time had come to move on. In a fashionable suburb of
Copenhagen, Mørk found a huge marble villa, which he thought suitable as
a new Sigint headquarters. However, when he presented his plans, including
a $5,000 bill for one year’s rent, to the Minister of Defence, Rasmus
Hansen, the Labour Party stalwart protested: it belonged to a capitalist!
Only when the cigar-smoking politician was presented with a box of fine
Cuban cigars, bought for the occasion, did he budge. On 1 May 1948,
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      219
 Commander Mørk and SR’s 15 employees moved in.‘TheVilla’was born:
the name under which Danish Sigint is known even today.18
    The service operated interception and direction-finding stations at
Løgumkloster in the south of Jutland, later also at Hjørring in the north, and
at Åkirkeby on the island of Bornholm, close to Poland in the Baltic Sea.
From 1948, another station opened at Danmarkshavn on the north-eastern
coast of Greenland, operated by one single radio telegraphist, which
intercepted Soviet radio traffic. At the same time, the SR continued its
interception of open and coded diplomatic communications to and from
foreign embassies in Copenhagen, in cooperation with the state-owned
Danish Telecom and Postal Service. In 1965, the interception of embassy
telex traffic was moved to the basement of the East Asian Institute in the
grounds of the University of Copenhagen. When discovered by students
four years later, it erupted into a scandal known as the Kejsergade affair.
    The Naval Radio Service achieved its first success covering a large
Soviet naval exercise near the island of Bornholm in the Baltic in 1948.
Soviet aircraft overflew the island, which caused anxiety both among the
politicians and the population. However, analysis by SR of the intercepted
communications proved that the Soviets only used Bornholm for
navigational purposes, and did not have other intentions, to the relief of the
government. Despite his achievements, and to his lasting bitterness, Mørk
was bypassed when the Danish government, in 1950, merged and
reorganised its intelligence services, appointing Colonel Hans Lunding,
who was a supporter of the Labour Party, as Danish intelligence chief.
    As second-in-command, Mørk concentrated himself on the running of
Sigint. The SR changed its name to Försvarets Central Radio (FCR, the
Defence Central Radio) and it moved in the autumn of 1950 with its 80
employees from ‘The Villa’to a new secret headquarters complex at
Aflandshage in a southern suburb of Copenhagen, from where it still
conducts its main eavesdropping operations. As in the other Nordic
countries, the onset of the Cold War saw a huge expansion of FCR, in close
cooperation with NSA and the German Bundesnachrichtendienst, having
been assigned the Danish straits, the Baltic and Poland as its main targets.

R E T U R N TO NORWAY

The Norwegian King and Government had chosen exile in London, from
where they continued the fight against the Nazis. The various intelligence
organisations had in 1945 several hundred employees at their London and
Stockholm stations; and a secret army of agents and informers behind
German lines in Norway, may of whom had been trained by the British
Secret Services. When Colonel Roscher Lund left Norway in 1946 to
220     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

become military adviser to Trygve Lie, the first UN Secretary-General, his
successor Colonel Vilhelm Evang could build his operations round a
substantial manpower base of war veterans.
    The British had not allowed Roscher Lund to run Sigint operations from
within the United Kingdom. However the Norwegians had kept in touch
with the Swedes during the war. They also had upheld the scientific study
of the Hagelin machine which were used on most of the exile government’s
communications, the aim being to secure the machine cipher against enemy
attack. When in doubt, and perhaps somewhat naively, Colonel Roscher
Lund and his Cipher Committee, as he wrote in his post-war London report,
contacted‘ t h e highest British cipher authorities’and showed them the
Norwegian systems, for discussions and acceptance. Once wanting to
establish a purely Norwegian telegraph circuit, Roscher-Lund got a firm no
from the British who demanded that he used the Hagelin cipher system,
known and accepted by them.‘German reports now tell us that the Germans
broke the ciphers of a number of countries. However, no Norwegian cipher
has been broken’, he proudly concluded, not mentioning the ability he had
given the British to read the Norwegian government’s supposedly secret
communications between London and its vital stations in Stockholm,
Moscow, New York and Washington.19
    Indeed I believe that this exchange of information and the mathematical
study of the Hagelin machines, which had been introduced in Scandinavia
before the war and which were extensively used on Allied communications
throughout the war, is vital to the understanding of the post-war success
claimed by European and US codebreakers. This success was to a large
extent achieved against some of the many nations world-wide that later
during the Cold War bought the Hagelin machines from Crypto AG.
    Among the users of Hagelin equipment were many of the foreign
diplomatic missions in Oslo, Stockholm, Helsinki and Copenhagen. The
diplomatic traffic to and from these missions had, in deepest secrecy and as
an emergency measure, been intercepted wholesale at least since 1939, an
activity which continued after the war. Norwegian cryptanalysts were able
to attack the ciphers of Italy, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Egypt and other
countries after getting access to computer power in the mid-1950s.20 The
Danes claimed in 1960 to read the ciphers of 23 countries, including Japan.
    In the light of later allegations against the Crypto company for giving
NSA trapdoor facilities, one may wonder whether Boris Hagelin, to help his
old Nordic friends, left more clues to his machines when he moved to
Switzerland than so far has been acknowledged. Although final and written
documentation is sparse, I believe that you cannot understand the success
achieved by European codebreakers after the war without understanding the
Hagelin history, a topic still awaiting thorough historical research.21
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                       221
    In Norway, Crypto got its main success in the field of communications
security when two engineers in the early 1950s patented a random number
generator, based on radioactive Cobalt. Connected to a teleprinter, the
ETCRRM code machine produced a onetime cipher of high quality.
Eventually 2,000 machines were sold and used on the main NATO
communications in Europe, and also on the Hot Line between the Kremlin
and the White House.22 The code machine was considered secure until the
discovery of the fatal dangers of electromagnetic radiation sent it straight to
the scrapheap of scientific history.

POST-WAR EFFORTS

In April 1944 Roscher Lund had proposed the creation of a new Norwegian
Secret Intelligence Service in which the collection of Sigint had to be
pursued‘with great energy’and a highly qualified staff.23 When his ideas
were realised, one of the trusted men of his pre-war‘Black Chamber’,
Lieutenant Jon Krag Brynildsen, became head of the new Radio Control
Office. Brynildsen, inspired by a visit to the Swedish FRA, proceeded in
1946 to establish small radio intercept stations at a former German Army
camp in Oslo, at Madlamoen outside Stavanger on the south-western coast,
and at Heimdal outside Trondheim in mid-Norway.
    In July 1946, a small expedition, codenamed‘Torkel’, was sent to the
town of Vardø, some 40 miles from the Soviet border in the High North.
During ten days the members of the expedition collected Soviet naval and
air force signals, some of which indicated secret Soviet testing of captured
German V2 rockets over the White Sea. A small cryptological department,
headed by another of Roscher Lund’s pre-war pupils, professor of
mathematics at Oslo University, Erling Sverdrup, later replaced by another
mathematician, Nils Stordahl, tried to break into the traffic.24
    A year later, in March 1947, a detachment of nine radio telegraphists
installed themselves in two ice-cold Nissen huts on an airfield outside the
town of Kirkenes, even closer to the Soviet border. The first Sigint station,
exclusively targeting the Soviet Union, had been provisionally established.25
    As the Cold War developed, the head of the new Norwegian Defence
Intelligence Staff, Colonel Vilhelm Evang, like his counterparts in
Denmark, actively sought American and British financial and technical
assistance. Alone, the Norwegians and Danes felt they had no chance to
withstand an attack from the Soviets. As international tension rose
throughout 1948, membership in NATO for both countries with their strong
Western ties seemed a logical step. So acutely did the Norwegians feel the
threat, even after the Atlantic Treaty had been signed, that five former senior
Nazi German officers, led by Wehrmacht General Bernhard von Lossberg
222      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

and Kriegsmarine Admiral Otto Ciliax, in July 1949 in deepest secrecy were
brought to Oslo to advise the Norwegian High Command on the conduct of
warfare under Arctic conditions.
    General von Lossberg was secretly kept on the Norwegian payroll until
the 1960s. He had in 1940 been one of the chief planners of Operation
‘Weserübung’, the surprise invasion of Denmark and Norway. Now, only
nine years later, he was back, teaching the Norwegians how to beat back a
feared Soviet cross-border attack, based on his experiences from the
Murmansk front.26

‘ N E U T R A L ’S W E D E N

Compared to the other Nordic nations, Sweden had had a relatively easy
war by appeasing and to a certain extent collaborating with the Nazis in the
early years. While Finland and Norway had to rebuild their war-torn and
plundered countries, Sweden came out of 1939–45 with a strong economy,
an undamaged industrial basis and modern intelligence services. Although
FRA, the Defence Radio Institute, which employed 384 men and women in
 1942, was reduced in size, the intercept stations were operational, and FRA
continued its work on Soviet and European communications, even attacking
the cipher systems of Japan and China in Asia and Brazil and Chile in South
America.27
    Up until Norway and Denmark chose the Western Alliance and became
members of NATO in 1949, there was close contact between the Swedish,
Danish and Norwegian cryptanalysts, based on the personal friendships
established before and during the war. Work was being done to develop
common ciphers for a possible Nordic Defence Union. When the German
Geheimschreiber central in a bunker in Oslo was captured intact, the
machines were taken apart and analysed. With certain improvements the
Geheimschreibers thereafter were used on specific teleprinter channels, one
of them being counter-intelligence landlines within Norway.
    The FRA was the entity within the Swedish Ministry of Defence that
handled all Swedish Sigint collection, processing, analysis and reporting.
From its headquarters and processing centre outside Stockholm close to
Bromma airport, the FRA operated five radio intercept stations, as well as
mobile Elint collection platforms operated by the Defence Research
Establishment (Försvarets Forskingsanstalt, FOA). The FRA also managed
its own research and development program for new Sigint collection and
processing equipment.
    Navy Commander Torgil Thorén, trained as a torpedo officer, described
as somewhat austere and harsh, but completely loyal to his staff, had been
appointed head of the FRA when it was reorganised in 1942. He continued
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      223

as its leader until 1957, taking the FRA and most of the war-veterans with
him into the post-war period, among them the highly intelligent leader of
the Crypto Section, Åke Rossby.
    As the Cold War developed, the FRA strengthened its Comint collection
against Soviet military activities in the former Baltic republics. The FRA’s
listening posts, including a large station on the Baltic island of Gotland,
intercepted all Soviet military radio traffic coming from the Leningrad and
Baltic Military Districts, as well as from Poland, Czechoslovakia and East
Germany.
    In the early to mid-1950s, the FOA was flying DC-3 Dakota aircraft (the
Swedish designation for the aircraft was TP-79) which were equipped with
Elint collection equipment provided by the United States through the CIA
station in Stockholm. The Swedish DC-3s spent most of their time flying
Elint missions over the Baltic Sea collecting information on Soviet radar
defences and movements of ships to and from Baltic ports. Of particular
concern to the FRA were the Soviet long-range bombers, whose activities
were closely monitored. The FRA was also copying and reading much of
the diplomatic traffic coming in and out of Stockholm, including telegrams
passing between Moscow and the Soviet embassy in Stockholm and KGB
traffic coming from Leningrad and the Baltic states.28

THE A M E R I C A N C O N N E C T I O N

Despite claiming to be neutral, another picture of Sweden’s political and
military role during the Cold War has slowly emerged during the last
decades. As the political scientist, Ola Tunander, has written,‘ i n a certain
respect, Sweden has long been “a hidden member of NATO” or, more
correctly, has been “plugged into NATO” with particularly close ties to the
USA’.29
     The first evidence of close intelligence sharing ties between neutral
Sweden, the United States and Britain dates back to the end of World War
II, and there are clear indications of a periodic exchange of Comint and Elint
information, with the US agreeing to provide Sweden with Elint equipment
for its DC-3‘Ferret’aircraft in return for the results of the flights.
     Beginning in 1947, the United States and the UK solicited the assistance
of FRA in collecting vitally needed Sigint on Soviet military activities in the
Baltic region. The United States provided aerial cameras and other
equipment to the Swedes, but reportedly refused to provide any
sophisticated Sigint equipment. The CIA, however, was under no such
restrictions and made such equipment available. According to a 26 January
 1949 USAF intelligence summary, Sweden had provided the United States
and Britain, through the British naval attaché in Stockholm, with Elint data
224     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

which established the presence of a chain of 15 Soviet radars on the Baltic
coast.
    To plug the gap in the global Sigint encirclement of the Soviet Union, as
it was disclosed during an interrogation of the convicted Soviet spy,
Swedish Colonel Stig Wennerström, US defence personnel in 1949
provided state-of-the-art technology to the Swedes, flying the equipment
into Swedish air bases at night in order to keep the arrangement fully secret.
Wennerström also betrayed the American/Swedish collaboration to his
masters in Moscow. Also in 1949, the Swedish Air Force extended its
‘Ferret’ flying missions on behalf of the Americans to the Kola Peninsula in
the North, thereby violating Finnish airspace over Lapland, disregarding
Finnish protests against these flights.
    Available information indicates that Sweden supplied to the Americans
Elint reports on Soviet radar locations and capabilities in the Baltic states
during periodic meetings in Washington DC. In return, the US gave to the
Swedes edited versions of their Elint summaries regarding Soviet radar
activity in that same area.30

THE MASK FALLS

On 3 May 1973 two Swedish journalists, Peter Bratt and Jan Guillou,
disclosed in the magazine Folket i Bild/Kulturfront the so-called ‘IB-
affären’. This article described, among other things, the ties between the US
intelligence agencies and the Swedish foreign intelligence bureau, the
Informationsbyrån (IB). The IB did not officially exist and, according to
Bratt and Guillou, the IB came into action when the operational capabilities
of the‘official’Swedish intelligence organisations had been exhausted.
    The mysterious IB, closely tied to the ruling Labour Party, was formed
in 1965. Its mission was both domestic and foreign, being authorised to
collect Humint abroad, and spying on anything looking like a threat to
national security at home through a network of informers.
    The revelation of IB’s existence became a watershed, not the least
because the magazine story in detail exposed how supposedly neutral
organisations in deepest secrecy seemed to cooperate closely with foreign
intelligence agencies– like the CIA, MI6, Mossad and Shin Beth in Israel,
BND in Germany, SDECE in France and IDB, BVD and MID in Holland.
     Among the later revelations made by the authors, who were eventually
arrested on 22 October 1973 and sentenced to one year in jail, was also the
fact that Sweden and the US had traded Sigint data for many years. Pursuant
to an informal agreement between the United States and the UK, the British
Sigint agency, the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ),
was given responsibility for handling liaison with the FRA. Nevertheless,
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                     225
the United States maintained an independent liaison relationship with the
Swedish intelligence services through the CIA’s chief of station in
Stockholm. It was revealed that the FRA had broken the diplomatic codes
and ciphers of Brazil, Zaire, China, Iran, Turkey, Japan, Czechoslovakia and
several other countries.
    Later it came to light that the FRA had executed Sigint operations
against the Soviet Union from within Finnish territorial waters, and even
eavesdropped on the Finnish parliament in Helsinki. The Swedish embassy
in the Finnish capital appears to have played an important role in the 1970s
and 1980s as an intelligence gathering station. Well-informed US sources
have disclosed that a Sigint unit of the FRA was established within the
embassy, monitoring Soviet diplomatic and military communications
emanating from the Leningrad district. The personnel was trained, and the
equipment delivered by the National Security Agency.
    In Stockholm itself, IB and Mossad agents broke into the Egyptian
embassy to inspect the Egyptian codemachines and copy their codebooks.
In exchange the IB received information about Soviet military hardware
from the Mossad and the CIA.
    The informal contacts between the FRA and the British GCHQ continued
well into the 1960s, including a joint operation to spy on the Russian cruiser
Ordzhonikidze that visited Stockholm in 1959. The FRA planned to operate
against the ship, and the local MI6 station chief suggested that GCHQ and
MI6 would help. The FRA accepted the offer, and the famous Peter
‘Spycatcher’ Wright flew to Stockholm. With the help of two FRA and two
GCHQ technicians, a so-called‘Engulf operation was conducted against the
cruiser’s cipher machines– apparently without success. A year later, Wright
and other British intelligence officers persuaded the FRA to relinquish its
‘neutrality’ and to provide GCHQ with copies of Soviet military intelligence
 (GRU) messages exchanged between Stockholm and Moscow during
 1941–45 as part of the still on-going Venona operation.31

J O I N I N G THE G L O B A L US SYSTEM

Meanwhile, in Norway and Denmark, the Defence Intelligence Staff and
‘the Villa’ were finding their places in the world-wide US and British Sigint
network. The two agencies had, on their own, started the collection and
analysis of Sigint in 1946, but truly modern Signals Intelligence came into
being some years later, in June 1952, during the Korean War, when two
Americans paid a visit to Scandinavia. One of them, Louis Tordella, was
travelling as Mr Jones, the other, Griffin Chiles, travelled as Mr Williams.
They were both key figures in US Sigint and later leaders of the National
Security Agency.
226     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Since Norway as the only one of the Scandinavian countries has
published an official study of its Defence Intelligence Staff from 1945 until
1970, we know most of what happened. At that time, the first permanent
Norwegian Comint station, outside the small town of Vadsø and close to the
Soviet border, had been operational for about one year with a staff of 20
radio telegraphists. In addition Norway had listening posts in Oslo,
Stavanger and outside Trondheim on the western coast. Although much of
the equipment was old and consisted of Adcock direction finders and other
leftovers from the war, the radio telegraphists had proved very adept at
understanding Soviet radio communications.32
    Attempts at cryptanalysis gave few solutions, but traffic analysis had
made great progress against the Soviet Navy, Air Force and land forces in
the North. The telegraphists had solved the very complex Red Navy system
for distributing callsigns and could therefore follow the movements of
Soviet warships, from hour to hour.
    The Air Force analysts were greatly helped by the rigidity of the Soviet
command system, whereby every pilot and commander had to file complete
flight plans for any airborne mission– and usually did so in clear text, the
night before the mission took place. By carefully analysing and filing away
every bit of data, the Norwegian Defence Intelligence Staff had, in
cooperation with the Swedish FRA, acquired a huge knowledge of Soviet
call signs and patterns of communication, and were able to locate and
identify most of the Soviet military units in the north-western area of the
USSR. They had also broken the coded Soviet grid system for navigation, a
system that had caused the Americans a lot of trouble.33 According to
legend, Tordella and Chiles returned to Washington very much impressed
with what they had learned in Scandinavia and immediately suggested
extensive co-operation.
    As for Norway, it was clearly established that if the Norwegians would
modernise and expand their Comint stations, they would find a willing
customer in the new National Security Agency, which needed a continuous
supply of intercepts for early warning purposes. Basically the Americans,
with the help of the Nordic countries, wanted to reconstruct and follow all
communications in the north-western part of the Soviet Union. In exchange
Norway would get US financial support and access to the latest in US high
technology.
    The controversial chief of Norway’s Defence Intelligence Staff from 1947
to 1966, Colonel Vilhelm Evang, a revolutionary Marxist before the war who
had served 30 days in jail for anti-military agitation, was an intellectual, a
graduate of the University of Oslo. He had worked with Roscher Lund in
London during the war, and with the Swedes in the late 1940s. He
immediately understood the importance of the deal being offered. With access
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      227
to American capital and knowledge, the Intelligence Staff could finally reach
the professional level he thought necessary to counter the Soviet threat, and
he therefore persuaded the Labour government to go ahead.34

INTO UKUSA

After hurried preparations the first early warning intercepts were delivered
to the Oslo CIA station on 16 September 1952, being followed by a steadily
increasing stream of more or less raw intercepts as more people were hired
and the network of Comint stations expanded.
    For the next 40 years the cooperation blossomed, unknown to the
general public and unknown to most of the politicians in the Norwegian
parliament. The belief in‘the Bomber g a p ’led to renewed pressure from
Washington to triple the capacity of Norwegian Comint from 100 to 300
Russian-speaking telegraphists, until the cooperation finally was formalised
on 10 December 1954.
    Louis Tordella and Frank Rowlett came to Oslo with a delegation from
the NSA and the CIA, to sign the top secret bilateral‘Communications
Intelligence Agreement’between the United States and Norway, known as
the NORUSA pact, thereby probably also giving Norway ‘Third Party’
status in the world-wide UKUSA Comint partnership.
    With the signing of the formal agreement, Norwegian Comint saw a huge
expansion during the next ten years, the stations being continually
modernised, and the number of staff reaching more than 800, working round-
the-clock to monitor Soviet communications. Very soon the daily product
reached enormous proportions. As early as 1957, the Intelligence Staff
couriers brought, every day, to the NSA/CIA cell at the American embassy in
Oslo for transmission across the Atlantic, over 1,000 intercepted telegrams,
350 pages of radio journals, 500 direction-findings, four or five big spools of
magnetic tape, containing intercepted voice communications, in addition to
daily summaries of various kinds. The materials were not completely raw, as
it was Norwegian policy to do the preliminary traffic analysis themselves to
secure a rough overview of what the Americans got– partially to be able to
control the quality of what they later got back of analysed material.

A C H A N G E OF P R I O R I T I E S

By the late 1950s, codebreaking attempts had more or less been given up,
and usually only about one to ten per cent of intercepts could be read. This
situation further deteriorated in 1965, when the Norwegian Security Service
was established as a separate organisation, and was given control over
Norwegian ciphers. The Norwegian Intelligence Staff then became one of
228     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the few– if any– foreign intelligence organisations in the Western world
which did not work on cryptanalysis– a tragic loss, according to many
veterans, as Norway now became totally dependent on the United States in
codebreaking matters.
    The areas covered by Norwegian Comint expanded from the Kola
region, the Barents and White Seas to include the vast areas of northern
Russia east to Dickson and south to Leningrad and Moscow, including some
of the satellite states of the USSR. While the Northern Fleet and the Soviet
bomber force had been at the top of the priority list in the 1950s, the early
1960s saw a change. At a meeting in Oslo in 1962, Louis Tordella, now
Assistant Director of the NSA, presented a completely new list of targets
with the new Soviet nuclear submarine fleet, the Soviet Strategic Rocket
Forces and nuclear bomb testing at the top. Below that on the list came
Soviet Air Forces, Soviet Air Defences, the Northern Fleet, the general
activity in north-western Russia and some civilian targets, including
shipping, fishing vessels and civilian air traffic.35

THE E X P A N S I O N OF‘ T H E VILLA’

It is widely believed, but not yet officially confirmed, that the Danish
government at about that same time entered into a similar ‘DANUSA’
bilateral Comint agreement, giving Denmark and ‘The Villa’ ‘Third Party’
status within the global UKUSA pact.
    The secret cooperation between the US and Danish intelligence
communities was certainly close. In the summer of 1954, the Danish
intelligence chief, Colonel Hans Lunding, informed the US air attaché in
Copenhagen that he was willing to assist the United States in conducting
special reconnaissance flights across Danish territory, flights which could
not be cleared through normal diplomatic channels.
    These so-called‘ F l u o r e s c e n t ’ flights passed across Zealand and
penetrated deep into the Baltic before returning. Lunding ordered his
Comint stations to monitor all Danish air traffic control channels to prevent
reporting of the US spy flights. He even assisted the‘Fluorescent’ flights
with Danish decoys. As the US‘ F e r r e t ’plane crossed into the Baltic, a
Royal Danish Air Force plane would take off and fly to the south of
Zealand, thereby attracting the attention of the East German radar and radio
stations. The monitored signals were then exchanged between the Danes
and the Americans. Four Danish airfields were earmarked as emergency
landing fields, and the enterprising Colonel even promised that a security
guard would be on alert to seal off and patrol the runway to prevent any
information reaching‘unauthorised’personnel, which probably included
several Danish politicians.
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                    229
    Historically, Denmark had enjoyed good relations with Poland and had,
since the beginning of the century, given home to a small but well organised
Polish immigrant community. Colonel Lunding was an equestrian of
international distinction, having won a bronze medal at the Berlin Olympics
in 1936. He had likewise spent a lot of time in Poland before 1939 and
established friendly relations with some Polish Army dragoons.
    As the Cold War intensified, Poland was seen as a key Eastern Bloc
intelligence target, situated as it was between the Soviet Union and East
Germany. Without secure roads and railway lines through Poland, the
Soviets would not be able to conduct ground war operations against the
West. Just one hundred kilometres to the north of the Polish coast, the
Danish island of Bornholm lay as a perfect listening post, with a ringside
view over military and political developments on the mainland. The
attempts by the CIA and MI6 to infiltrate into Poland had been a disaster.36
When a representative of Danish intelligence in 1954 met John Bross, head
of CIA’s Eastern Bloc Department, he was first of all interested in what
information about Poland the Danes could provide.‘Could they find only
one source among a thousand, willing to give information of value, it would
mean better results than all previous efforts’, Bross said, according to the
Danish report.37
    When Denmark at about that time entered the UKUSA pact, it is
therefore fair to assume that‘TheVilla’was given Poland as its main target.
    Danish Sigint even reached beyond Europe. When Christmas-Møller,
who for some years served as an intelligence analyst in Copenhagen, in the
1960s was briefed about‘The Villa’by Commander Mørk, he was given a
sheaf of intercepts, describing negotiations in which South Africa invited
Rhodesia and Portugal to join a military alliance. When the secret report,
based on these intercepts, was shown to the Danish Foreign Office, they
wanted more– especially intercepts revealing the Japanese position on
textiles in the tough trade negotiations going on at that time.
    It was on this occasion that Commander Mørk said that‘The Villa’had
grown to more than 1,000 employees and were able to read, whole or in
part, the ciphers of 23 foreign countries.

A NEW F I N N I S H SIGINT SERVICE

Ten years apparently passed between the end of World War II and Finland’s
first careful attempt to re-build its Sigint services. When the Finns
eventually started, in 1955, they had to start from scratch under the
threatening shadow of the Soviet Union, and with many of their best
codebreakers in permanent exile, Paasonen retiring to Portugal, and
Hallarna ending as a carnation grower in Spain.
230     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Afraid of provoking the Soviets, Finland has up until quite recently
shrouded their Sigint efforts in the outmost secrecy. Of the sparse
information available, the first Comint intercept station, targeting Soviet
Russia, seems to have been opened in October 1955 at an Air Force base
near the town of Jyväskylä in central Finland, under the covername,
Viestikoelaitos (VKL), the Signals Experimental Institute. The driving force
is said to have been Army General Lauri Sutela, head of Finnish Military
Intelligence and in the 1970s Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
Despite misgivings among the few senior Finnish politicians who knew
about Sutela’s initiative, the service was secretly expanded and became a
unit under the General Staff in 1960. Intercept and direction-finding stations
were set up, mostly in abandoned and empty buildings throughout Finland,
while centres for codebreaking and analysis were established in the cities of
Tampere, Rovaniemi and Kuopio.38
    In October 1967 Elint and Telint became a separate department of the
VKL, headed by Engineer Corps Major Lasse Lehtonen, who also worked
with the Electro-technical Research Institute in Espoo outside Helsinki.
Some ten years later, VKL had the first Finnish‘ F e r r e t ’ flights airborne,
using old DC-3 Dakotas, codenamed‘ L e e n a ’and‘Ursula’. The Dakotas
were in the 1980s replaced with modern Fokker Friendship aircraft.
    In 1988 the VKL was re-organised as a department within the Finnish
Air Force with Colonel Keijo Kepsu as its commander. Its headquarters was
then and now discreetly placed within the perimeter of the Tikkakoski air
base, some 25 kilometres to the north of Jyväskylä. While for example
Norway and Sweden up until recently exchanged Comint summaries on a
daily basis, similar exchanges between Finland and the other Nordic
countries have never been reported. It is however widely believed that
Finnish Sigint, at least in recent years, has developed contacts with the US
intelligence community.

EARLY WARNING

Elint and Telint in Scandinavia, outside Finland, evolved in parallel to
Comint, with the US Air Force as the driving force. The USAF wanted early
warning of a possible Soviet bomber attack from air bases in northern
Russia, and they needed precise intelligence about Soviet radar and air
defences for their own‘route planning’for the B-52 bombers which would
sweep over the Arctic regions towards Moscow and reduce central Soviet
Russia to‘ a smoking radiating ruin’within hours, should war break out.
   In Norway the first attempts to intercept radar and other electronic
emissions took place from mobile stations in 1954, and led, in the next 15
years, to the establishment of highly advanced Elint stations– some of them
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                        231
placed on various mountain tops close to the border, and with a free view to
a number of installations on the Soviet side.39
    These worked in conjunction with the huge combined Elint station and
search-and-tracking radar, codenamed‘South Sea’, just outside the small
coastal town of Vardø, 40 miles from the Soviet border. When the first signs
of Soviet missile testing in the Barents Sea were detected in 1961, the focus
was redirected from the ground and into space. From now on, the base
complex was expanded and co-ordinated with Comint to follow the flight of
Soviet test missiles, including cruise missiles and SLBMs testfired from
submarines, and ICBMs testfired from Plesetsk, 150 miles to the south of
Archangel.
    From 1957, the Soviet nuclear bomb tests at Novaya Semlya and
Semipalatinsk, and the Chinese tests at Lop Nor, were monitored from
stations in central Lapland, which provided the Western Allies with
information crucial to the implementation of the 1963 Test Ban Treaty.
    When the new Telint station, codenamed‘Cod Hook’, at the township of
Fauske, near the Polar circle, came into being in 1965, the re-orientation
towards Soviet nuclear missiles and space activities was complete. From
this station Soviet satellites in a polar orbit could be tracked, as could rocket
launches from Plesetsk.
    Since‘Cod Hook’lay within the footprint of Soviet satellites downloading
over Moscow Control Centre, the station intercepted telemetry and other
emissions of high intelligence value about space-based Soviet spying, both
with regard to photoreconnaissance and to Elint. This expanded the area
Scandinavian Sigint could cover beyond the northern hemisphere and into the
Middle East, the Indian Ocean and the South Atlantic.
    During the Gulf War in 1991, Norwegian Sigint technicians were
decorated by NSA because they provided the US Air Force with vital
intelligence from the Iraqi battlefields.40
    The bilateral agreement between Norway, NSA and CIA was
reconfirmed on 1 August 1970 in a pact called NORUSA II, this one
including both Comint and Elint. At that time about 800 people were
employed in the around-the-clock Comint effort and about 200 in Elint and
Telint. Some 80 per cent of the cost was paid for by the US.

SOSUS IN THE N O R W E G I A N AND B A R E N T S SEAS

Finally, a separate development took place underwater, when the
Norwegian Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) was established in the late
1950s on an experimental basis. The first underwater listening cable was
placed on the seabed to the west of the Lofoten Islands to detect Soviet
submarines passing between northern Norway and the island of Jan Mayen.
232     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

In the 1960s and 1970s, in a secret cooperation with the US Navy, a number
of other cables were laid, gradually moving to the east of North Cape as the
Soviet submarines got more and more quiet and sought other transit routes
from their Kola bases to their patrol stations. From the Norwegian land
station in the heart of Lapland, Soviet nuclear submarines were
fingerprinted and tracked, in close cooperation with SOSUS stations in the
United Kingdom and Iceland, and with airborne reconnaissance.
    The intelligence produced was a result of a very complex process,
involving both Comint, Elint and Acoustint. To track a Soviet submarine, all
radio traffic, on various nets, concerned with submarines entering and
leaving harbour was monitored, including what could be gleaned from the
Soviet‘Glonass’navigational satellites. These intercepts were crosschecked
against information from US spy satellites, from SOSUS and from sonar
buoys dropped from Orion and Nimrod aircraft. It is known from the
recently published book Blind Man’s Bluff that US spy submarines
penetrated into Soviet waters and placed bugs on underwater Soviet
communication cables in the Barents Sea.41
    It is fair to assume that, in the end, the picture emerging from all these
different intelligence sources gave the Western Allies a very good insight
into the movement of Soviet strategic submarines– even up to recent days.
    When the Soviet submarine Komsomolets started burning in the
Norwegian Sea in 1989, the fire was first discovered by a US spy satellite,
which found a hot spot in the ocean. After that, Norwegian Comint took
over, picking up and relaying to Washington the voice communications
between the aircraft flying over the scene and the home base in
Severomorsk. Finally, when the submarine went down, SOSUS could
follow and tape the underwater sounds created by that tragic event; first
Komsomolets sinking, then about half a minute of silence until the hull
imploded with a cracking sound that made echoes through the ocean from
coast to coast, none of which, of course, was ever reported in the press.42
    In 1965, the‘ S o u t h S e a ’Sigint station detected its first Soviet
submarine-launched ballistic missile, a SS-N-6‘Sawfly’rocket which could
carry a thermonuclear warhead from a submerged‘ Y a n k e e ’submarine
 1,300 miles towards enemy territory. It marked the start of the development
of the Barents and White Seas into becoming the main Soviet testing ground
for new weaponry– both ballistic and cruise missiles.
    When the complete history of Sigint during the Cold War is written, I
think one will find that the continuous supply of precise and updated
information about the Soviet Rocket Forces as each new generation of
missiles were developed and tested, will prove to have been the one major
contribution from Scandinavia– of crucial importance to the USA, and to
NATO.
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      233
C R O W D E D SKIES OVER THE BALTIC

The Swedish FRA operated in the 1980s an extensive network of listening
posts situated along Sweden’s coastline. FRA managed its main station at
Lovön near Stockholm, which was equipped with a circularly-disposed
antenna array (CDAA) antenna, and where FRA’s analysis was done. There
is also evidence to suggest that FRA operated another listening post at Umeå
in northern Sweden, as well as another two important sites on Gotland in the
Baltic. In addition to these stations there was also a FRA unit situated in
Blekinge. (The FRA only performs Comint collecting and processing. The
responsibility for collecting and processing Elint is the responsibility of the
Defence Logistics Establishment.)
    In Denmark,‘ T h e V i l l a ’continued to expand with financial and
technical help from the United States. In the 1980s, from the Aflandshage
headquarters outside Copenhagen, six listening posts were operated
throughout Denmark, copying Polish, Soviet and East German traffic.
These listening posts were located at Aflandshage itself, which worked on
diplomatic and commercial traffic, the three HF intercept and direction
finding stations at Hjørring, Løgumkloster and Almindingen on Bornholm,
and the big Elint intercept sites at Gedser on the southern tip of the island
of Falster, just across from the East German port of Rostock, and a second
identical site at Dueodde on the southern coast of Bornholm, just off the
Polish coast.
     The land stations were not alone. The first issue in 1978 of the Royal
Swedish Air Force Bulletin disclosed the flood of spy planes from both
Eastern Bloc and Western countries, which were crowding the skies over the
Baltic Sea. The magazine published maps, showing the‘highways’used by
the spy planes, and described the various types that had been observed by
Swedish intelligence. The story told the readers that the Cold War was being
fought on Sweden’s and Denmark’s doorsteps– and that the intelligence
activity easily could turn into a political nightmare.
    For example, in late 1976, an American Sigint RC-135 aircraft almost
collided with an Aeroflot commercial airliner just to the south of Gotland.
The Swedish government protested and pointed the US embassy in
Stockholm towards two other near misses in September that year, also
involving an American RC-135.
    The number of Sigint flights had increased dramatically, making the
Baltic and Gulf of Bothnia an intelligence-gathering playground. The main
target of the West was the new Surface-to-Air Missiles (SAMs) being
deployed by the Soviets in the Baltic border regions, and in East Germany,
especially the SA-5‘Gammon’missile batteries near the port of Rostock,
later the SA-10s.
234     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Similarly, the Soviets had shifted many spy planes to airfields further
west, at one time reportedly operating more than 66 aircraft as Elint and
photoreconnaissance platforms.
    Sweden had their own reasons for worrying. A few years earlier, on 13
June 1952, one of their DC-3 Dakota Elint aircraft was shot down over the
Baltic Sea by Russian fighters while on a spy mission. Despite claiming that
the Dakota had crashed close to the Swedish island of Gotska Sandön, the
Swedish government knew better, and later has had to accept that the crash
site was near to the Latvian coastline. A Convair TP-47 Catalina flying boat,
which had been sent out to look for survivors, was also attacked by Soviet
MiG-15 jet fighters near the island of Huumand. Swedish radio intercept
operators, who recorded the conversations of the Soviet fighter pilots,
monitored the entire attack. Despite the loss, the Swedish Air Force
continued tofly‘Ferret’missions off the Soviet Baltic coastline.
    Rumours that the crew of the DC 3 survived and was picked up by the
Soviet Navy and detained for life in the Gulag, have never died. Some are
of the opinion that crew members were still alive in the 1990s, and that one
of them may have been an American intelligence officer.43

ELINT A I R C R A F T

In 1953, after the loss of the Dakota, Sweden purchased a British TP-82
Vickers Varsity Hastings transport aircraft for the nominal purpose of
conducting high-altitude radio trials. In fact, the heavily modified Varsity
performed Elint collection missions over the Baltic until 1973. The
nickname of the plane was the‘Flying Pig’. It now sits rusting on the grass
at the Swedish Air Force museum at Linköping.
    In 1960, Sweden purchased from the RAF two Canberra B.2s high
altitude reconnaissance aircraft for the same purpose, and, in 1971, added
two second-hand Aerospatiale SE 210 Caravelle passenger aircraft from
SAS to replace the Varsity and the Canberras which shortly thereafter were
pensioned off.
     In March 1974 the planes had received Sigint modifications and each of
the two aircraft had been modified with a plethora of antennas. It was
rumoured that the planes carried a crew of eight to ten Sigint technicians in
the rear of the aircraft. The missions were flown in Swedish as well as
international airspace at altitudes up to 14 km to obtain as large a ‘footprint’
to monitor as possible. Missions usually lasted four to six hours and
attracted from time to time the attention of foreign fighters.
     The two Caravelles, stationed at Malmslatt Air Base, near Linkøping,
would fly for some 25 years and perform exactly the same task as the British
RAF Nimrods, the German Breguet Atlantic Sigint gatherers and the
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      235
American RC-135s, which frequently could be encountered on Barents and
Baltic Sea patrols. In the 1990s their role has been taken over by a new fleet
of Gulfstream IV high-altitude Sigint aircraft.
    The Swedish Navy operates its own spy ship, the 201-foot long Orion
(A201), which was commissioned in June 1984. With a displacement of
1,400 tons and a maximum speed of 15 knots, the Orion carries a crew of
35, conducting Sigint collection in the Baltic Sea. In November 1985, a
Soviet minesweeper in international waters in the Baltic rammed the Orion
when she got too close to a Soviet naval exercise. According to Swedish
sources the Orion was built with extensive support from the National
Security Agency. The Swedish military negotiated directly with the director
of NSA, Admiral Bobby Inman, and the final go-ahead for building the ship
came immediately after US Secretary of Defense, Casper Weinberger, had
visited Stockholm in 1981.
    Despite outwardly keeping its distance from the enormous intelligence
efforts directed against the Soviet Union and her Warsaw Pact allies,
Sweden’s true and secret role was quite different, hidden from the Swedish
public. As Ola Tunander sums it up:
      According to a Swedish senior intelligence officer, the Swedish
      Signals Intelligence Agency (FRA) was responsible ‘within NATO’
      for covering the Soviet Baltic Republics; it was also vital for adapting
      American bombers and later cruise missiles to the Soviet air defences
      in the Baltic, so that they could break through to Leningrad and
      Moscow. In the 1980s, a Swedish Signals Intelligence vessel, the
      Orion, was built to cover the Soviet Baltic area and adapt US cruise
      missiles and B-1 bombers to the low-level radars of the Soviet air
      defence system, SA-10.
     Sweden had the same responsibility for the Soviet Baltic Republics
     (primarily because of the Swedish island of Gotland in the Baltic Sea)
     as‘other’NATO states had for their neighbouring areas of the Warsaw
     Pact: Norway, with its northernmost border to the USSR, was
     responsible for covering the Kola Peninsula and the naval and air
     defence bases around Murmansk; Denmark was responsible for
     Poland (because of the island of Bornholm); and West Germany was
     responsible for East Germany...44
   May be this new interpretation of the political and military realities
explains the reasons behind the angry American reaction against the late
Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme’s criticism of the Vietnam War: He did
not tell the Swedish public about his government’s contribution to the war.
The Americans had got much of the intelligence about Soviet air defences,
radars and surface-to-air missiles from Swedish Sigint in the Baltic. It was
236     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

precisely this intelligence that helped American bombers penetrate the
airspace above Hanoi, which explains why many US intelligence officials
regarded Palme as a hypocrite.

CONCLUSIONS

As a function of geography, Scandinavian Sigint was superbly placed to
cover the Soviet war machine. All available evidence indicate that most, if
not all, resources were committed against the Eastern Bloc military target.
    The combined intelligence collected from the Sigint land stations, from
the Norwegian spy vessel Marjata in the Barents Sea, from the Swedish
Orion in the Baltic Sea, from continuous‘Ferret’flyingmissions along the
Soviet perimeter, and from numerous Humint missions into the ports of
Murmansk, Archangel and Leningrad by agents on-board merchant ships,
gave the United States and the Western Allies an enormous amount of
intelligence about the Soviet war machine.
    We have not, as yet, any reports that finally confirm the breaking of post-
war Soviet military ciphers. On the contrary, despite sending literally tons
of intercepted communications to the NSA, no report has ever come back,
for example to Norway, that indicates that the massive codebreaking efforts
were successful. What we have is some incidents where communications
were read– not because of successful codebreaking, but because the Soviets
made mistakes in the uses of their communication procedures.
    We know that‘black-bag’jobs were done by breaking into foreign
embassies and stealing codes and ciphers, and we know that cipher clerks
were regularly targets of blackmail and other kinds of pressure and
temptations. Despite that, no reports have reached the public domain that
confirm that codebreaking in later years did produce great results against the
Communist bloc. The Defence Intelligence Staff and the Security Service in
Norway did for years monitor the radio communications between all East
European embassies in Oslo, and their home stations. In the 1970s, when
hunting for a spy in the Norwegian Foreign Office, it was seen that the radio
traffic between Oslo and Moscow Central peaked once every month, and it
was assumed– rightly as it turned out– that the Soviets were sending home
important information after meeting a spy in Oslo. Despite an enormous
effort, with the help of the NSA, not a single word of the traffic could be read.
     The agent, a female secretary, was only arrested in 1978 through police
surveillance. She had then been a spy for nearly 30 years. The case was filed
away as Operation‘Impossible’.
     Nevertheless, it is reasonably clear that the combined Scandinavian
Sigint effort gave the United States and the Western Allies an almost
complete insight into the order of battle and state of readiness in the Soviet
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                      237
Baltic Republics, Poland and north-western Russia, and, crucial to defence
planning, a fundamental overview of the capabilities of Soviet armaments.
    When, in the future, all is revealed, one may conclude that US nuclear
attack submarines, through Scandinavian Sigint and cable-tapping
operations, were placed in a position to be able to wipe out the Soviet
strategic submarines, thereby coming close to robbing the Soviets of their
second strike capability.
    Scandinavian Sigint also helped ensure that vital elements of the Soviet
missile arsenal were rendered obsolete, and would have been quite useless
against American naval targets in case of war. We do not yet know how this
brilliant product of Scandinavian Sigint influenced the new and offensive
US Maritime Strategy and other important policy decisions in the later
stages of the Cold War– but the influence may prove to have been great.

THE D O W N F A L L

In 1992, the great downfall of Scandinavian Sigint occurred, when the US
Congress drastically reduced US payments for signals intelligence
operations directed against the former Soviet Union.
    Norway and Denmark were hit very hard. In Norway alone, 350 people
immediately lost their jobs, when four out of six Comint stations were
closed.
    The Soviet war machine had to a large extent disintegrated. There was
no longer any need for huge hour-to-hour Sigint operations, as the level of
activity within the Soviet forces diminished, and the threat appeared to
vaporise. Today, in Norway, only the Comint and Sigint stations in the
Soviet border area are operational. They have just gone through expensive
modernisations, making the intercept process more or less automated, and
integrating them with American and Canadian stations to cover the whole
Arctic area. The‘South S e a ’Sigint station is being equipped with a huge
radar which can look deep into space, while the new 5,000-ton spy ship
Marjata continues to prowl the waters of the Barents Sea and elsewhere,
spying on Russian submarines and missile tests. Seventy people at SOSUS
headquarters listen to the faint sounds of the few Russian nuclear
submarines still operational, while the‘Cod Hook’station tracks Russian
satellites.45
    The changes and the cutbacks have been dramatic– likewise in Sweden
and Denmark, where many old Comint stations have been closed.
    For more than 40 years the threat from the Soviets was the main raison
d’être for Scandinavian Sigint. We do not know if it would have been able
to fulfil its primary mission: to provide the West with a strategic warning of
Soviet war preparations– as the threat never materialised.
238      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    The paradox is, of course, that none of the Sigint agencies– either in
Scandinavia, nor in the US, or in the rest of Europe– foresaw the dramatic
changes which appeared in Eastern Europe, and which culminated in the fall
of the Wall, despite the enormous amounts of sophisticated equipment, and
the billions of dollars spent.

L O O K I N G FOR A NEW M I S S I O N

 Today, Scandinavian Sigint operators are desperately looking for a new
 mission. They try to find it in the Balkans where a Scandinavian Sigint cell
 still is operational in Bosnia as an element of the Stabilisation Force. They
 are trying to find it in other areas– whether it be fighting terrorism,
 organised crime, or other threats against society.
      Curiously, we have not one single reported and confirmed example of
 Scandinavian Sigint being used to cover civilian targets– except one
instance where Norway or Sweden allegedly intercepted the
communications of the Quebec separatists in Europe, on behalf of the
Canadian government.46 This may be explained as the effect of excellent
cover-ups– or because the Soviet Union was the all-dominating priority,
which I think, to a large extent, is the truth.
     This again may soon change as it is evident that the Scandinavian
agencies are about to involve themselves in intercepting satellite
communications. As late as 1994, the NSA encouraged the Norwegian
Defence Intelligence Staff to monitor civilian traffic to combat possible
terrorist threats against the Lillehammer Olympic Games.47 The plans
included a Satcom intercept station with 125 employees, but the Norwegian
government said no. The 100 million-dollar investment and the political risk
was deemed to be too high. It is widely believed among intelligence
officials that, at the same time, both Sweden and Denmark said yes. They
entered the Satcom intercept business with new and sophisticated stations,
which give them the possibility to intercept a huge variety of military and
civilian communications, to conduct economic spying, and even enter the
famous Echelon partnership.48
     This may signal a new era– and indeed a new life. During the Cold War,
Scandinavian Sigint became a one-eyed monster, dedicated to the overthrow
of Soviet Communism. If the Sigint organisations can adapt to a new and
completely different world and lift the pre-World War II heritage, where I
started this account, they may again become providers of independent
information for the decision-makers in the Nordic capitals.
     One thing is a least for certain: in a world full of conflicts, and with only
one remaining superpower, the value of qualified and independent
intelligence for small nations is higher than ever.
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                                       239
                                          NOTES

1. The ‘base policy’ was announced by the Norwegian government on 1 February 1949 in
   response to a Soviet note asking whether Norway, as a consequence of its membership in
   NATO, would allow air and naval bases to be established on Norwegian territory. The answer
   was negative with some rather subtle qualifications. No foreign troops would be stationed as
   long as Norway was not attacked or under threat of attack. Denmark later announced similar
   reservations at the same time‘allowing’the Americans to station nuclear weapons on
   Greenland. For discussions about the base policy, see for example Mats R. Berdahl, The
   United States, Norway and the Cold War (London: Macmillan 1997) p.6ff, or Rolf Tamnes,
   The United States and the Cold War in the High North (Oslo: Ad Notan 1991) pp.60ff and
   79ff. For a recent study of Sweden’s problematic‘neutrality’, see Ola Tunander,‘The Uneasy
   Imbrication of Nation-State and NATO. The Case of Sweden’, Cooperation and Conflict,
   Nordic Journal of International Studies 34 (1999).
2. A parliamentary commission, appointed to investigate claims that the Norwegian Secret
   Services illegally had spied on Norwegian citizens, got access to all archives and officers of
   the three services in question: the Defence Intelligence Staff, the Defence Security Service
   and Norwegian Counterintelligence, which is a police unit. Despite interviewing more than
   600 former and serving officers during 1994–96 and getting, in the Western world,
   unprecedented access to Intelligence records, the commission found very little to support the
   allegations. Although the commission left some questions open, its main criticism was
   directed against Norwegian Counterintelligence Service which had been too diligent in
   following the orders they got from the different post-war governments. They had spent too
   much time and resources on spying on the Communists and other left-wingers for too long.
   The commission was named after its chairman, supreme court judge Kjetil Lund. The Lund
   Commission’s 600-page report was published on 28 March 1996 as Parliamentary document
   Nr. 15 (1995/96). In another move to stem the flood of more or less fantastic accusations
   against the Defence Intelligence Staff, historians Olav Riste and Arnfinn Moland were
   engaged to write the staff’s official history. The study was called‘Strengt Hemmelig’: Norsk
   etterretningsteneste 1945–1970 [Top Secret] (Oslo: Universitetsforlaget 1997) and appeared
   in English as The Norwegian Intelligence Service, 1945–1970 (London and Portland, OR:
   Frank Cass 1999).
3. Yves Gyldén, Chifferbyråernasinsatser i världskriget till lands (Stockholm 1931). For more
   information about Gyldén: David Kahn, The Codebreakers (NY and London: Scribner 1966)
   p.422ff. A more recent study was published by Bengt Beckman as Svenska kryptobedrifter
    [Swedish achievements in cryptology] (Stockholm 1996). Beckman came to the Swedish
   Sigint Service, Försvarsväsendets Radioanstalt (FRA) or National Defense Radio Institute,
   as a young recruit in 1946 and retired as head of cryptanalysis in 1991. Gyldén was one of
   the founding fathers of Swedish Sigint before World War II, but could not stand his fellow
   codebreaker Arne Beurling, later a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton
   and by many considered the most brilliant of the Scandinavian cryptanalysts. Gyldén was
   also president of the Swedish Rugby Union, and fought his most famous battle when tensions
   between him and the great Beurling reached such proportions in 1940 that it ended in a
   bloody fistfight outside the headquarters of the Defense Radio Institute in Stockholm. See
   Beckman (supra) p.124.
4. Alf R. Jacobsen and Egil Mørk, Svartkammeret: Den innerste hemmeligheten [The Black
   Chamber] (Oslo: Cappelen 1989). I wrote the book with Egil Mørk, who, at only 15 years of
   age, in 1936 became the youngest member of Roscher Lund’s Cryptology Club. Colonel
   Roscher Lund died from cancer in 1976, spending his last years working on transportation
   matters in the Norwegian Department of Trade without getting the public recognition he
   deserved.
5. For more information about Damm, Hagelin and the Cryptograph company: Kahn (note 3)
   p.415ff. and Beckman (note 3) p.29ff.
6. For a good, brief account of the exciting history of Finnish Sigint; see David Kahn,
   ‘Finland’s codebreaking in World War II’ in In the Name of Intelligence. Essays in Honor of
   Walter Pforzheimer (Washington DC 1994).
240      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

 7. Beckman (note 3) p.55ff.
 8. When a member of Roscher Lund’s private network of informers broke into the German
    consulate in Bergen and stole the content of the wastepaper baskets, it gave him and his
    group the ability to break the code used on messages between the German Abwehr agents in
    Bergen and their headquarters in Hamburg. On that occasion Roscher Lund apparently went
    to Stockholm and got help from his friend, Yves Gyldén, although no written documentation
    exists. The cooperation seems to have been close between Stockholm and Helsinki, although
    Arne Beurling in 1940, at the famous Operakällaren bar in Stockholm, castigated Erkki Pale
    for Hallamaa’s apparent unwillingness to share Finnish results against Soviet systems with
    the Swedes. The young Beurling had visited the Finnish codebreakers in January 1940,
    during the Winter War. The temperature stood at 40 degrees Celsius below zero when he was
    invited into the sauna followed by a roll in the snow.‘It’s the first time I’ve experienced a
    temperature difference of more than one hundred degrees’, said Beurling who enjoyed
    physical hardship.
 9. Tore Pryser,‘From Petsamo to Venona’, Scandinavian Journal of History (1999).
10. See Nigel West, Venona: The Greatest Secret of the Cold War (London: HarperCollins 1999)
    p.1ff.
11. Jacobsen and Mørk (note 4) p.38ff.
12. In The Destruction of Convoy PQ17 (London: Cassell 1985). David Irving credits a
    Luftwaffe unit in Northern Norway with intercepting and breaking British naval ciphers.
    However, Beckman (note 3) writes (p.187f.): ‘When the Germans attacked Soviet Russia, the
    Swedish codebreakers got unexpected help. The Germans were intercepting and breaking
    Soviet traffic in Northern Norway and Northern Finland and sent their results to Berlin on
    the Geheimschreiber teleprinter lines through Sweden. The Swedes [who read the
    Geheimschreiber, my comment] now could check their own codebreaking results against
    what the Germans had achieved...When a convoy approached Northern Russia, it was
    overflown by Soviet aircraft who reported the number of ships, their speed and positions.
    Later, when Soviet naval vessels were sent out to escort the convoys, the radio traffic
    increased. Swedish Comint intercepted and read the Soviet telegrams and so did the
    German/Finnish radio intelligence service in Northern Finland, unfortunately...We sat
    ringside and could follow the progress of the convoys...We knew what the Germans knew,
    and we knew how they planned to destroy the merchant ships...’According to Beckman a
    young Finnish intelligence officer, listening to Soviet Air Force traffic, in June/July 1942
    intercepted and broke a telegram, giving a complete description of the famous PQ17 convoy
    which a few days later was destroyed by German bombers and U-boats. Some time later the
    Finns broke another Soviet telegram, describing the next convoy, PQ18. The decoded
    telegram was given to the Germans and transmitted through Stockholm to Berlin. Thirteen
    of 40 ships were sunk. The Swedish cryptanalysts, reading both the German/Finnish and the
    Soviet traffic, and knowing what might happen, found the experience nerve-racking,
    according to Beckman. The Swedish chief of Combined Intelligence, Col. Bjørnstjerna, gave
    some of the intercepts to the British Naval Attaché in Stockholm, Capt. Henry Denham.
    When it was discovered, the Colonel was fired. See Henry Denham, Inside the Nazi Ring
    (London: John Murray 1984) p.79ff.; F.H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World
    War 2, Vol. II (London: HMSO 1981) p.210ff, and Beckham (note 3) p.184.
13. Beckman (note 3) p.194ff.
14. Pryser (note 9). Mainly for reasons of Cold War politics, I suspect, few seem to differentiate
    between the Winter War (Nov. 1939–March 1940) when the Soviet Union attacked Finland,
    and Operation‘Barbarossa’in June 1941, when the Finns joined the German attack against
    the Soviets in the North. A large number of German and Finnish codebreakers worked side-
    by-side behind the Murmansk front in Northern Norway and Northern Finland. They had to
    flee in the autumn of 1944 when the Russians broke through the German lines and advanced
    into Norway, a little known chapter of WW2. The codebreakers escaped in two groups. The
    ‘Stella Polaris’ group came directly to Sweden when Finland capitulated in Sept. 1944. The
    German Meldekopf Rovaniemi (later Meldekopf Nordland) who had worked with two
    Finnish Sigint companies, plus its own German troops, in Northern Finland, retreated to the
    south of Norway. When the German Army in Norway finally surrendered in May 1945, the
SCANDINAVIA, SIGINT AND THE COLD WAR                                                         241
    remaining 36 codebreakers crossed into Sweden from the town of Lillehammer with their
    crypto material in boxes and suitcases. What happened after the group was flown to
    Wiesbaden and taken into custody by the OSS, is not known. It is not unreasonable to think
    that some of their material ended in the hands of the US National Security Agency, and
    therefore may help explain the remaining questions surrounding‘Stella Polaris’. See the
    discussions in West’s Venona book (note 10) p.8ff., and in C.G. McKay’s,‘Debris from
    Stella Polaris: A Footnote to the CIA-NSA Account of Venona’, Intelligence and National
    Security 14/2 (1999) pp.198–201.
15. In recent years there has been a growing willingness among historians in the Nordic
    countries to penetrate the myths of WW2 and the rhetoric of the Cold War and look more
    soberly on the historical events. Two excellent Danish studies are Henrik Dethlefsen and
    Henrik Lundbak (ed.) Fra mellemkrigstid til efterkrigstid (Copenhagen 1998) and Claus
    Bryld and Anette Warring, Besœttelsestiden som kollektiv erindring (Copenhagen 1998). See
    also note 16.
16. Wilhelm Christmas-Møller, Obersten og kommandøren [The Colonel and the Commander]
    (Copenhagen 1995) p.29ff.
17. Interview with former British Naval Intelligence officer, 6 Nov. 1998.
18. Christmas-Møller (note 16) p.145ff.
19. Col. Roscher Lund’s report on the work of the London Intelligence Staff, p.11.
20. In 1954 Norway signed a contract for the very first commercially produced computer in
    Britain. The Mercury computer was delivered from the Ferranti works in Manchester in 1957
    and paid for by secret Intelligence funds. The money, about 200,000 US dollars, a
    considerable sum at that time, apparently represented the US/British investment in the Stay
    Behind networks in Norway. Nothing was entered into the books, and the machine was
    smuggled to Norway in the diplomatic post. Nominally owned by the Norwegian Defence
    Research Institute, the computer was used to solve their mathematical problems, and also, to
    try to break Soviet ciphers – without success. See, Jacobsen and Mørk (note 4) p.l99ff., and
    Olav Njølstad and Olav Wicken, Kunnskap som våpen [Knowledge as a weapon. The history
    of the Defense Research Institute, 1945–1975] (Oslo: TANO Aschehoug 1997) pp.395ff.
21. For the allegations against Crypto AG, see Scott Shane and Tom Bowman,‘ N o Such
    Agency. Rigging the Game’, Baltimore Sun, 10 Dec. 1995 and Wayne Madsen,‘Crypto AG:
    The NSA’s Trojan Whore?’, Covert Action Quarterly No. 63 (Winter 1998) pp.36–42.
22. See‘From the memoirs of a Norwegian cryptanalyst,’paper delivered at the Eurocrypt 1993
    conference by Professor of Mathematics, Ernst Selmer, who worked in Roscher Lund’s
    cipher office in London during WW2. Selmer writes:
       I was on a course in the Hagelin factory in Stockholm, and had just taken an electrical
       machine into parts and pieces, when Hagelin senior passed by. Addressed to me, he said
       that‘it is easy to take it apart, more complicated to reassemble it, and much more difficult
       to make it work afterwards’...But the next day, I could show him a working
       machine...(We) suspected that the Hagelin cipher might be broken, at least from
       corresponding plaintext and cipher, that is, from pure key. We therefore shuffled different
       parts of each message, and used a strange mixture of, often abbreviated, Norwegian and
       English...I continued (to work on breaking the Hagelin machine cipher) after the war, and
       it was quite clear that only manual calculations would be too time-consuming. In 1952, I
       still did not have an electronic computer at hand, but now I did at least know very much
       about computer design [Selmer had worked on computers with von Neumann in the
       United States, my comment]... I used this to draw a special purpose relay computer,
       earmarked for breaking the Hagelin cipher. It was built...and was used for several years
       breaking the diplomatic cipher of some foreign countries.
    Selmer’s work as a consultant for the Defence Intelligence Staff was considered to be so
    secret that he had to get a special permission from the taxman to leave his crypto income out
    from his tax returns, which in Norway in those days was harder to get than Top Secret
    clearance.
23. Roscher Lund’s plan, 28 April 1944. See Jacobsen and Mørk (note 4) p.l57ff.
24. Erling Sverdrup interviews, 1986.
242       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

25. Riste and Moland (note 2) p.24ff.
26. Private information and Riste and Moland (note 2) p.50.
27. Beckman (note 3) p.230.
28. Dr Cees Wiebes,‘Sssh! It’s Swedish SIGINT. A short history of the FRA’ private paper,
    Amsterdam 1999.
29. Tunander (note 1).
30. Wiebes (note 28).
31. Ibid. pp.11. See also, Peter Bratt, IB och hotet mot vår säkerhet (Stockholm 1973) and Peter
    Wright, Spycatcher (NY: Viking 1988). The warship had of course featured in the
    Commander Crabb incident at Portsmouth in 1956.
32. Riste and Moland (note 2) p.131ff.
33. Confidential interviews with Norwegian intelligence officers, 1996–99.
34. Because of his revolutionary youth, Col. Vilhelm Evang was regarded by many Americans
    as a communist and a security threat. One of the men who followed Evang with suspicion
    was James Angleton, head of CIA Counterintelligence. When the paranoid defector Anatolij
    Golitzin in 1961 told Angleton about a female spy, who had served at the Norwegian
    embassy in Moscow, they pointed their fingers at an unmarried Norwegian woman who
    belonged to Evang’s staff. She had served in Moscow 1956–59 and occasionally done
    services for the CIA. Encouraged by Angleton, the woman was arrested in 1965 and spent
    three months in jail before she was released. She was innocent. The real spy was another
    woman who had served in Moscow before her, from 1947 to 1956.
        Angleton and Golitzyn, supported by Evang’s enemies in Norway, went after the wrong
    woman to get rid of‘the red colonel’at the top of the Norwegian Defence Intelligence Staff.
    The results were tragic. Both Evang and the head of Norwegian Counterintelligence were
     sacked. The woman, who had suffered a wrongful arrest, never recovered from the shock.
    The other woman kept on working as a Soviet agent for another 12 years. See Tom Mangold,
     Cold Warrior. James Jesus Angleton: The CIA’s Master Spy (London: Simon & Schuster
     1991) p.114 ff. and Alf R. Jacobsen Iskyss (Oslo: M. Aschehoug 1991) p.239.
35. Riste and Moland (note 2) p.l50ff.
36. Stephen Dorril, MI6. Inside the Covert World of Her Majesty’s Secret Intelligence Service
     (London: Free Press 2000) p.249ff.
37. Christmas-Møller (note 16) p.133.
38. Private information and Helsingin Sanomat, 22 Nov. 1998.
39. Riste and Moland (note 2) p.l56ff.
40. Confidential interviews.
41. Chris Drew and Sherry Sontag, Blind Man’ s Bluff (NY: Public Affairs 1998) p.209ff.
42. Confidential interviews.
43. Wiebes (note 28) p.8.
44. Tunander (note 1).
45. A heated debate has been going on for several months about the new‘Have Star’radar at the
    old‘South Sea’site in Norway. Recently transferred from Vandenberg Air Force Base in the
    United States, the critics claim that the radar is part of a planned US anti-ballistic missile
    defence system.
46. Mike Frost, Spyworld (Toronto: Doubleday 1994) p.239. Despite vigorous efforts, no one so
    far has been able to confirm Frost’s story in Scandinavia. The Quebec separatists, at that
    time, had their European headquarters in Paris. Later, they opened an office in Stockholm.
    The telegrams mentioned by Frost may have been intercepts of traffic in and out of this
    office.
47. Confidential interviews.
48. The Danish Satcom intercept site is believed to be at Aflandshage, the old ‘Villa’
    headquarters just to the south of Copenhagen. See the articles in the Danish newspaper
    Ekstrabladet, 17 Sept. 1999 and 18 Sept. 1999.
                                     8
         Dutch Sigint during the Cold War,
                      1945–94

                           CEES WIEBES




On 28 November 1973 the Intelligence Co-ordinator dispatched a
memorandum to the Netherlands Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister.
In this Top Secret minute the co-ordinator stated:‘Dear Prime Minister and
foreign secretary. I think that I do not have to convince you that the WKC
is the most valuable asset we have to collect an intelligence product that is
valuable for all interested parties.’Indeed, there was no need to persuade
these two in those days, Prime Minister Joop den Uyl and Foreign Secretary
Max van der Stoel, of the value of the signals intelligence product produced
by the WKC.1 The two ministers needed no convincing because from the
start of the oil crisis in October 1973 they received many and excellent
communication intercepts from the Wiskundig Centrum (Mathematical
Centre, WKC). It is the Dutch equal of the American National Security
Agency (NSA) or British Government Communications Headquarters
(GCHQ). The name of Wiskundig Centrum (Mathematical Centre, WKC)
was changed in 1982 into Technisch Informatie Verwerkings Centrum
(TIVC, Technical Information Collection Centre). This Sigint organisation
played an important role as regards interception and decoding of satellite-
and other communication traffic. During the October war in 1973 and
subsequent oil embargo against the Netherlands several times every day a
whole bundle of intercepts (the so-called Red Edition containing European
and Middle Eastern diplomatic intercepts) was dispatched by a special
courier to the residence of the Dutch Cabinet.
    Writing a contribution about the history of signals intelligence in The
Netherlands was not an easy undertaking. As the good book says: Sigint is
intelligence derived from a combination of Communications Intelligence
(Comint) and Electronic Intelligence (Elint). However, I have to postulate
that Elint is done in the Netherlands solely on very small scale by the Navy
Intelligence service. Accordingly, in Holland we are mainly dealing with
244     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Comint. Nevertheless, here I will write about Sigint and not distinguish all
the time between Comint and Elint.
    As previous contributors in this work already have pointed out: getting
hold of archival materials and in particular as regards Comint and Elint
related matters, is extremely difficult and in some countries even
impossible. For this reason, I am very grateful that the Netherlands Ministry
of Defence, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Cabinet Office
declassified hundreds of formerly top secret official documents to me
dealing with this signals intelligence service. This service, nowadays named
the Afdeling Verbindingsinlichtingen (AVI), is more or less the roof over
three Sigint pillars being the Sigint units of the Navy, Army and Air Force.
However, in the rest of this contribution I will stick to its former name
TIVC.
    As regards the period of the declassified documents which were made
available to me: they range from 1946 to 1994 and deal not only with the
internal history but also with the private discussions in the Cabinet as
regards the financing and future tasking of the TIVC. Of course, not
everything was declassified, as you will understand. More than nine pages
solely dealing with the successes and achievements remained top secret.2 I
am also grateful and indebted to various‘ o l d intelligence hands’who
worked in the past at the TIVC or in the Dutch Directorate of Navy
Intelligence (DNI) whom were willing to share their knowledge with me
about the operations of the TIVC.3
    Nevertheless, seen in this light, it will be clear to the readers that this
analysis has to be regarded as a real first attempt to reconstruct the Sigint
history of the WKC/TIVC during the Cold War. This is a hard job enough
already in view of the many sensitive issues involved. Accordingly it is
certainly and absolutely not the full, complete and final history. On the
contrary, many blank spots still have to be filled in, in particular the Sigint
operations against the former communist enemy. Giving this aspect and the
limited space, I will therefore not pay much attention to the role of the Code
Coordination Bureau, the various Sigint activities of the Netherlands Army
(898th Radio Battalion) and Air Force (1st LVG) and other organisations
involved in the Netherlands with Sigint related matters.

THE P R E S E N T SITUATION

The foundation of the Netherlands intelligence community was laid
between 1940 and 1945. Already during World War II the Netherlands
government-in-exile realised that it had bitterly failed as regards its pre-war
intelligence capabilities. In London therefore the new structure of a future
Netherlands intelligence community would be developed. The basic
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                     245
elements of such a future community were worked out and soon after the
liberation various new services were established. As regards national
security a service was established soon after the liberation of the
Netherlands in May 1945 and it mainly dealt with tracking down
collaborationists, members of the German intelligence and security services
like Abwehr and Sicherheitsdienst and possible units of the Nazi Stay
Behind organisation, the Werewolf. This service functioned until 1949.
    The Cold War had changed the scene and a manifestly strong
Communist Party led to the establishment of a National Security Service
(Binnenlandse Veiligheidsdienst, BVD) which is comparable to MI5
in Britain. The BVD came under the Minister of Interior despite efforts by
the Justice Department to get the responsibility for the security service.
However, the memories of World War II were still very fresh. In order
not to create the general impression that the BVD would be a kind of
‘new Gestapo’ it was decided to make a separation between the
counter-intelligence and executive functions. The former was given to the
BVD. Investigation, arrest and detention became a responsibility for the
police.
    The BVD was formally established in 1949 by confidential royal decree.
This defined its functions as collecting information about all persons who
tended to, were or had been involved in activities dangerous to the
Netherlands or to friendly countries; gathering information about politically
extremist movements; the furtherance of security measures in all vital and
vulnerable government and private institutions and industries; and the
maintenance of liaison with friendly foreign security and intelligence
services.4 The BVD is a service with roughly 500 employees.
    From 1945 onwards there were also three intelligence and security
services of the armed forces being the Army, Navy and Air Force
Intelligence services. However, plans to integrate these three services into
one Defence Intelligence Agency (Militaire Inlichtingendienst, MID) never
materialised because the three military services were refusing (as in many
Western nations) to relinquish their sovereignty and each service went its
own way. The MID was formally created in 1987 when the three intelli-
gence services of the armed forces were integrated into this new
organisation. The prime task of the MID is to gather intelligence as regards
the strength, activities and intentions of foreign armed forces which in the
past meant mostly Soviet and Warsaw Pact nations. The MID has also a
close liaison with the Intelligence Division of NATO. Altogether in 2000
more than 700 officials were working at the MID.5 Their present activities
are also dealing with peacekeeping and/or peace-enforcement operations in
which Dutch military forces were or are involved. Operations have been
executed in Cambodia, Haiti, Cyprus, Namibia and Bosnia.
246   SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                          FIGURE 8.1
       THE HQ OF THE DUTCH DEFENCE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                      247
    Another important element of the intelligence community has been its
foreign intelligence service. In 1946 the Dutch government decided to
establish such a service which was later called the Inlichtingendienst
Buitenland (IDB).6 In a confidential royal degree its task was the gathering
of intelligence concerning developments abroad which could be
advantageous to the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The service was
dismantled in 1994 by the Dutch Cabinet.7

THE B E G I N N I N G

Late in 1946 it was decided at the request of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to establish a service, which would deal with decrypting foreign codes and
cipher traffic. In January 1947 the Cabinet formally gave the green light and
the first head of the TIVC would become Colonel J. A. Verkuyl, the head of
the Code Coordination Bureau. This unit was initially responsible for
codebreaking but later in particular involving the manufacturing of codes,
namely the art of cryptography, and keeping up to date with the know-how
as regards cryptanalysis, being the process and science of converting
encrypted or encoded messages into plain text.8 The TIVC was from the
start a part of Dutch Naval Intelligence (Marine Inlichtingendienst,
MARID), called Marid VI.
    The primary reasons why the TIVC became a naval outfit were actually
threefold. First of all, it was much easier to camouflage the yearly TIVC
budget in the overall budget of the Netherlands ministry of the Royal Navy.
Second, the Dutch Navy had ample space to house the TIVC, which other
departments did not have. Third, the Navy had already various Sigint
experts, which would sooner or later come back from the Netherlands East
Indies (NEI) where they were still on active military duty. In particular they
were working in this former Netherlands colony as cryptanalysts.9
    In the beginning the TIVC had no interception capabilities and the
material in the beginning consisted mainly of coded messages which arrived
by safe hand. In 1948 a group of Navy telegraph operators were hired and
two intercept facilities were founded: one in Amsterdam, which existed
from mid to late 1948. Hereafter came Hellevoetsluis, which is situated
south-west of Rotterdam, and this site operated from late 1948 until October
1952.
    From the start the activities of the TIVC were greatly helped because
Dutch intelligence officers had recruited an American expert who worked at
the NSA. This spy was the cryptologist Joseph Sidney Petersen who worked
at Arlington Hall as head of the Russian section.10 He forwarded useful and
valuable information as regards codebreaking activities and methods. For
example, he provided to his Dutch caseofficers and handlers a top secret
248     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

American analysis of the inner workings of the Hagelin Cryptograph Type
B-211 which machine was used in those years by many countries. He also
informed his Dutch counterparts that the Americans were reading the Dutch
diplomatic traffic.
    American officials regarded the Petersen case as a very serious matter.
No one less than James Jesus Angleton, working at the counter-intelligence
unit of the CIA, flew to Holland. He was wearing a belt in which a onetime
pad was hidden for his personnel secret communications with Langley. This
immediately led to a row with the CIA station chief in The Hague, Justin
O’Donnell. He gave Angleton a choice: either to communicate to Langley
via O’Donnell or‘get the hell out of here’. After these threats Angleton
caved in.
    In talks with officials of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Angleton demanded to speak to Petersen’s Dutch contacts. This was flatly
refused. He then asked for files and correspondence dealing with Petersen.
He was told that there were only two letters, which he was not allowed to
read. This infuriated Angleton. However, the Ministry allowed him to put
forward a list of questions.
    From Angleton’s list of questions transpires that he was mainly interested
in the question if Petersen had given any secret intelligence to his Dutch
runners as regards foreign ciphers and codes, foreign cipher systems and in
particular secret material on American efforts regarding North Korean codes
and ciphers. Had Petersen for instance given away a very sensitive document
entitled‘Routing of North Korean Political Security Traffic’?11 Dutch
officials denied this. Angleton was also interested if the Dutch had forwarded
American intelligence documents to third countries. Again this was denied.
Interestingly, Angleton also repeatedly wanted to know if Petersen had told
the Dutch anything about the American relationship with Boris Hagelin, the
constructor of cipher machines. The answer was again a denial. In order to
calm down Angleton Dutch officials told him that everything Petersen had
given them had been destroyed.12 Angleton left Holland empty handed and in
a very angry mood: the Dutch had kept him completely in the dark as regards
the documents Petersen had given them.
    After a trial and conviction of Petersen the story hit the Dutch press. In
particular the Communist daily De Waarheid paid quite some attention to
the spy case to the dismay of many American officials. The daily alleged
that the CIA had set up networks in Holland. However, the first secretary of
the American embassy, Oliver M. Marcy, sent a calm report to the State
Department.
      If the communist press had significant circulation in The Netherlands,
      which it does not, there might have been occasion for some concern
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                       249

      at this interpretation. However, communist assertions are viewed with
      some scepticism in this country, and public interest in the Petersen
      affair had already flagged by the time the communists came up with
      their idea. It therefore seems unlikely that many Dutchmen have been
      persuaded that in the Petersen case the finger of suspicion should be
      pointed at the United States.13
    Also the British embassy reacted relieved. The Petersen case produced
only‘ a mild stir’.14
    Nevertheless, Dutch intelligence officials are certain that the Petersen
case produced quite a chill in the American-Dutch intelligence relationship.
It certainly did not lead to a situation like in Britain, Norway and many other
countries whereby the NSA would finance a large part if not most of the
yearly budget of the Sigint service. The Dutch had to do it on their own and
in the end the outcome was not that disadvantageous.
    In 1948 roughly 50 officials were working at the TIVC. They booked
their first successes in breaking various Indonesian codes delivered to them
by safe hand. The machinery they used for this effort was hired from IBM.15
The TIVC was originally housed at the Navy Barracks at Kattenburg in
Amsterdam and was a support unit of the Commander-in-Chief of the Royal
Netherlands Navy. The TIVC which eventually had world-wide capabilities
was not only intercepting maritime military networks for the Intelligence
Bureau of the Royal Dutch Navy but also started to intercept diplomatic
traffic by radio and international postal and telegraph communication
networks used by companies and individuals.
    From the start there been a secret arrangement with the main postal and
telegraph office in the centre of Amsterdam where all open but also coded
and ciphered telegrams were brought to in order to be dispatched by
telegraph. A similar arrangement was executed in The Hague. At these main
postal and telegraph offices copies were made of most if not all of the
important telegrams and then delivered to the cryptanalysts of the TIVC. In
this manner extremely valuable economic intelligence was gathered
because in this way many commercial secrets and other trade information
flowed into the hands of intelligence officials. Very often the economic
traffic (cipher or encoded) by telegram and later telex posed few problems
for the codebreakers. The codes were often simple to solve and decipher.16
    The TIVC (unlike the Army and Air Force Sigint units) never had any
analytic and distribution capabilities for non-military traffic. For this reason
the Inlichtingendienst Buitenland (Netherlands Foreign Intelligence
Service) was used as conduit to the various ministries and in particular to
the Foreign Office and the Departments of Trade and Agriculture. For
example, Sigint was responsible for the fact that the Ministry of Trade came
250     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

to understand why Czech industrial goods were not delivered to the
Netherlands but were diverted to the Soviet Union and Poland. This
happened after the so-called coup d’état in Prague in February/March 1948.
When a new trade agreement had to be negotiated with the Czech
government the Dutch were in a far better position because of the
intelligence derived from these intercepts.17
     Except for the traffic to and from foreign embassies in The Hague the
TIVC also intercepted many commercial messages dealing with quotations
and tenders, with which the interests of Dutch companies and firms were
involved. A big take of this kind of Sigint traffic went to the Department of
Trade and in particular the unit dealing with foreign trade and commercial
relations and the unit Industrial Projects.18 These units were used as a
conduit to forward these commercial intercepts to multinationals and large
firms like Philips, Shell and the aeroplane manufacturer Fokker.
     To the Netherlands Department of Agriculture intercepted and
deciphered traffic was passed along dealing with for example the results of
harvests and crops in foreign nations. The Dutch ministry was for instance
in particular very keen on learning more about the yearly harvests of
potatoes in Malta. While the Netherlands was and still is a big producer and
exporter of potatoes and products made from potatoes themselves the
Ministry of Agriculture could learn in this way more about the harvest
results of one of their main competitors on the European agricultural
market.
     The independence of Indonesia in late 1949 resulted immediately in the
return of many specialists and their interception equipment from the
Netherlands East Indies. Some of these specialists stayed in the region and
were transferred to the last colonial Dutch possession in Asia, the island of
New Guinea. There they were later involved in the defence of the island
 against Indonesian military incursions and attacks, a matter to be dealt with
extensively in the next contribution to this work, written by Wies Platje. In
the meantime the plans for expanding the intercept capabilities in Holland
were right on track. More staff were hired and receivers, direction-finders
 and other equipment were ordered in the United States
     In 1950 the director of the TIVC, Verkuyl, who also recruited and ran
the American spy Petersen at the NSA was forced to resign. The
circumstances remain clouded, even to this day. Some claim that he was
fired because there was a lack of management and that he was not capable
of steering the WKC internally.19 Verkuyl took revenge because he remained
head of the Code Coordination Bureau (CCB). He and his successor were
apparently angry with the new Director of the TIVC, which led to the
 situation where the CCB refused to transfer one of the older Hagelins in
their possession to the TIVC. This very vulnerable cipher machine was still
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                    251
used in the 1950s and 1960s by many nations, in particular those which
recently had become independent in Africa and Asia. Also many
multinationals and big firms still used the Hagelin. Within the TIVC they
did not possess this certain type and for this reason they could not do
anything with many intercepted ciphered Hagelin messages.20

L I A I S O N WITH THE A M E R I C A N S

The successor of Colonel Verkuyl was J. Spanjaard, a retired lieutenant
colonel of the Royal Netherlands Indies Army. He would give a great
impetus to the expansion of the TIVC. In the background also a conflict
with the Netherlands National Security Service played a role. It turned out
that the director of the BVD, Louis Einthoven, had made an agreement with
Verkuyl but also with the CIA station chief in The Hague, Justin O’Donnell.
Einthoven could lay his hands on a copy of an original Czech codebook,
which he had obtained from a Czech defector. He subsequently had asked
Verkuyl to decipher the diplomatic telegrams from the Czech embassy in
The Hague. This arrangement was executed without informing the director
of the Directorate of Navy Intelligence.
    This conflict also shed an interesting light on how the BVD and TIVC
viewed cooperation with the American services. The Netherlands
Directorate of Navy Intelligence Service wanted to keep a certain distance
from this American intelligence service. Although there was cooperation it
remained afraid of disclosing its capabilities. However, the BVD embraced
the CIA wholeheartedly. There had already been talks between the BVD
and the CIA in Brussels about the shipment of five direction finders to the
BVD for communication intercept purposes. The BVD was in particular
interested in tracking down secret Communist agent transmitters.21 In return
the BVD would deliver raw intercepts from the Soviet embassy in The
Hague.
    For some time Verkuyl was the liaison in this arrangement and he had
forwarded on a regular basis this raw intelligence to the CIA station chief
O’Donnell in The Hague. However, Spanjaard had in October 1951 stopped
the weekly shipment of intercepts to the American embassy because the
CIA never replied or did not return valuable intelligence on a quid pro quo
basis. The American intelligence agency apparently was not willing to share
its secrets with the Dutch services and the exact content of these telegrams
(whether or not they were deciphered) was never made known to the Dutch
services.22
    Einthoven of the Dutch BVD talked this over on 6 March 1951 at CIA
headquarters in Langley, Virginia. The Agency had made clear that a
response from the forerunner of the NSA could not be expected.23 The
252     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

American services would guard their secrets about whether they had had
any success with these Dutch intercepts of Soviet diplomatic, military and
even perhaps KGB and GRU traffic. However, this episode shows that the
TIVC was in this early period not the sole service trying to lay its hands on
intercepts. The BVD was also active in the field of signals intelligence. For
example, as the Dutch intelligence historian Frans Kluiters revealed, it had
its own eavesdropping site inside a building opposite the Polish embassy in
The Hague. This BVD listening post was probably involved in monitoring
Polish diplomatic and military traffic coming from the embassy.24 Actually,
this was almost a mirror of the situation in Warsaw. In the 1970s the Poles
did the same eavesdropping with respect to the Dutch embassy in Warsaw.
In those days the Dutch embassy represented Israel in Poland and was
heavily involved in organising the emigration of Polish citizens who wanted
to settle in Israel.
    Spanjaard vigorously began expanding the TIVC. He proposed to the
Cabinet various plans and ideas as regard the future status of Marid VI. The
staff had to be enlarged from 92 to 165 and he introduced various units
within the TIVC. There existed already from 1947 a cryptanalytic unit but
he also introduced new ones such as a traffic analysis unit and also
installed a documentation unit. This had to keep track of all latest
developments in the domain of Sigint. Of course, Spanjaard was helped by
the circumstance that the Netherlands government had signed the North
Atlantic Treaty in 1949. This meant that the Dutch services now also had
international obligations. Dutch Naval Intelligence for example had
obligations vis-à-vis SACLANT while the Air Force and Army
Intelligence closely cooperated with SACEUR. This led also to a
geographical division: the latter were mostly continental and Warsaw Pact
oriented. They had focus on identification, the actualisation of the order of
battle and early warning.
    However, the TIVC as a marine intelligence organisation had world-
wide military tasks and obligations but it also had to produce political and
commercial intelligence products for several ministries like the Cabinet
Office and Foreign Office. For this sole reason the TIVC was in need of a
greater variety of technical intercept equipment and a larger staff compared
to the two other military Sigint services. The TIVC had to keep track of the
Soviet, Polish and East German maritime build-up in the Baltic, Atlantic
Ocean and North Sea. Although these fleets were not yet a direct maritime
threat the TIVC continued to monitor all developments and especially hull-
identification of Soviet naval vessels. Later the TIVC was also obliged to
deal with out-of-area matters as in the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                       253
THE F I N A N C I A L P R O B L E M S

With respect to the civilian tasks: the TIVC for example was instructed to
monitor foreign postal radio connections for diplomatic and economic
traffic, diplomatic radio communication networks of foreign governments
and to study material and intercepts which was delivered by safe hand via
the BVD, IDB or other sources. This led to a situation which hampered the
steady grow of the TIVC and which would bother the various directors
almost constantly over the last 50 years. The main problem would always
remain who would finance the TIVC? Would that be the Department of
Defence or should other ministries also take a part of the growing financial
burden? It was a problem, which was actually never solved in a satisfactory
manner.25
     In 1950 the budget of the Department of the Navy was scaled down and
it turned out that the Ministry of Defence was no longer able to pay for all
the costs of the TIVC. A proposal was tabled in the Cabinet to make the
various recipients of the TIVC product pay for the intercepts they received
on a daily or weekly basis. Every day a so-called Green Edition was
produced containing the most important diplomatic intercepts. However, all
departments refused and the Department of Defence was forced to pay all
costs of the TIVC. The debate over which would finance the TIVC started
from this year: an issue to which I will return to later. One cost saving
solution proposed was the idea of hiring conscripts. However, this was
rejected due to the fact that the security clearance for the very delicate work
at the TIVC was extremely high. Another idea was to separate the TIVC
from the Navy and make it an extension of the Foreign Intelligence Service.
However, this plan also never materialised.26
     Despite all these financial problems the search for good intercept sites
continued. One was established in October 1952 in the north of Amsterdam
at Zeeburg. This site replaced Hellevoetsluis. However, in view of the
150,000-volt power lines crossing the station it soon turned out that Zeeburg
had limited intercept capabilities. The TIVC had no access to the intercept
stations of the Army Intelligence in Gorkum and Air Force Intelligence in
Zeist. From those sites these units could monitor the communication radio
networks of the Soviet military forces in Poland, East Germany and
Czechoslovakia. However, sites belonging to the Dutch Postal and
Telegraph Service (PTT) were used like the ones in Goes en Ockenburg.
From there the Eastern European and Middle East diplomatic traffic was
monitored. Goes also monitored the traffic of East European embassies.27
     Later also the PTT sites at Kerkrade and Waalsdorp were used for the
interception of diplomatic radio networks.28 Kerkrade for example
monitored the Yugoslav transmitter YTC in Belgrade, which transmitted
254     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

primarily messages of economic importance. The transmitter YTC also
produced diplomatic traffic from Yugoslav Foreign Secretary, K. Popovic,
which he sent to the Yugoslav ambassadors abroad.29 The Army was not
happy with the TIVC use of Goes and Kerkrade. It accordingly could not
operate these sites and this hindered its own eavesdropping activities.
    Until 1950 there was no formal cooperation between the Army and
TIVC. This is not so strange as it appears. The Navy was primarily
interested in world-wide maritime targets and was involved in intercepting
diplomatic, political and economic traffic. The Army and Air Force were
mainly interested in the military developments in the German Democratic
Republic and Poland. They mainly targeted Soviet and Warsaw Pact armed
forces. In the framework of assigned tasks within NATO Army and Air
Force intelligence were soon expanding their intercept capabilities. Despite
the different targeting, the TIVC tried to improve the cooperation and a
formal merger was proposed but on conditions as formulated by the Navy.
This was rejected by the two other military intelligence services because
they probably feared that their signals requirements were to not be taken
care of sufficiently in such a new-fashioned TIVC.30 Nevertheless, the later
diplomatic and military conflict with Indonesia over New Guinea would
force the Dutch Army and TIVC to cooperate more closely. But it has to be
said: cooperation with the Army Sigint service would never reach an ideal
situation in the Netherlands.
    What certainly improved in the early 1950s was the governmental
steering of the overall collection effort of Sigint. Various official bodies
were established such as the National Telecommunications Board (NTR),
the Radio Intelligence Committee (RIC), the Radio Intelligence Bureau
(RIB) and the Crypt-Analytic Interception Committee (CIC), These official
bodies would steer the overall Sigint gathering effort better and more
smoothly. In these committees representatives from the various departments
and the foreign intelligence service would have a seat in order to give
explicit guidance to the TIVC and the Sigint units of the Army and Air
Force. More important was the direct involvement of the Coordinator (more
or less the Netherlands intelligence tsar), which brought the Cabinet Office
closer in contact with the work of the TIVC.
    In the meantime the collection effort of the TIVC continued of course
and a so-called Green Edition of sometimes 30–50 pages was produced on
a daily basis. It contained mainly diplomatic intercepts about political and
economic matters and was sent off six times a week. In the beginning there
was also a special Blue Edition which contained economic Sigint but this
was later integrated into the Green Edition.31 A few automatic recorders
were bought which enlarged the Sigint take, although the TIVC in this phase
did not work with computers such as the NSA and GCHQ had at their
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                      255

disposal. However, various requests for additional radio receivers and extra
direction finders were consequently rejected between 1953 and 1957.
Accordingly, the cryptological section was sometimes forced to even devise
its own equipment and machinery mainly because of financial reasons.
    For this reason Spanjaard kept on hammering for more financial
resources. For example, after the Hungarian Uprising in 1956 he dispatched
a damning memorandum to the Director of Naval Intelligence. He
complained in this memo that because of a lack of staff and rather
insufficient and not up-to-date radio equipment the TIVC had not been able
to intercept enough Hungarian and Soviet diplomatic radio traffic before,
during and after the uprising. Valuable Sigint was accordingly never
intercepted. Spanjaard claimed that the result was‘practically nothing’.32
For Spanjaard this experience of the TIVC not being able to keep pace with
an international political and military crisis was enough reason to renew his
earlier attempts to separate the TIVC from the Directorate of Navy
Intelligence in 1957. There was absolutely no future for his organisation in
this service.33
    Interestingly, Spanjaard never contemplated merging or working more
closely with the two other military Sigint services. And this was exactly the
RIC and CIC were meant for: closer cooperation in the domain of
codebreaking activities and traffic analysis. However, it never materialised in
the Netherlands and in the day-to-day situation the cooperation of the TIVC
with foreign Sigint services was much better compared with the
collaboration between the Dutch Sigint services of the Army and Air Force.34
    These attempts did nevertheless produce some results and shook up the
government in The Hague. Extra financial support was made available and
in 1958 another five Hell recorders, two Marconi direction finders and ten
Collins receivers were bought in the United States. Also some new staff was
hired. In this year also the first computer‘Zebra’was introduced. Actually
those who worked with the machine described it to me as being more or less
an advanced electronic calculator. However, this Dutch computer ‘Zebra’
which had the size of a small container had a serious problem. It went
completely out of control when it became too hot. The night shift of the
TIVC was sometimes not particularly in the mood to work all night (like
many people on long and sometimes boring work). So, what did they staff
do? Often they closed all windows and doors. Accordingly the temperature
in the room went up and the‘Zebra’computer quickly collapsed because it
ran too hot. The night shift then had nothing to do and was of course
 subsequently sent home.
     It was not until 1963 that the‘ Z e b r a ’computer was moved to an air-
conditioned area where there was also ample room for a second computer.
Later the TIVC would buy several IBM Tempus computers. Soon the
256     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

machinery was expanded with computers from Bell (in 1952 and in 1965),
DEC (1974), the German company Siemens and also the British Racal.35
Both were well known names and products in the world of Sigint.
    Also special printers to absorb the heavy load of daily Sigint intercepts
were required. However, these printers were quite expensive in those days:
roughly $35,000 each. The TIVC could not pay for this but this time the
NSA was willing to assist. The Americans eventually offered seven printers
(almost $300,000) as a gift to the TIVC. By nature the TIVC was confronted
with the question: had the NSA not build in a so-called‘backdoor’which
would enable the NSA to spy on the systems of the TIVC. To counter this
danger the TIVC placed all seven printers in a cage of Faraday in order to
be 100 per cent sure that the NSA would not be able to eavesdrop on the
Dutch Sigint service.36
    With so much new equipment: the search for good intercept sites
continued constantly which resulted in 1962 in the closure of Zeeburg. Soon
a new locality south-east of Amsterdam was discovered and it turned out to
be an ideal location. There was absolutely no interference with the reception
of traffic and it was situated quite close to Amsterdam. The nearest town
had no plans to build near this piece of real estate. After the mayor of the
nearby town was convinced (he did not like the view of the huge antennas)
the TIVC had a brand new site.37 The construction of this intercept site
started in 1961 and in 1962 the station was formerly opened. It was Eemnes,
which still exists.
    The‘Granger’antenna, which is still at Eemnes was bought from US
Navy Intelligence. Actually, it was some sort of clandestine operation
because the American intelligence service was not allowed by law to sell
this antenna abroad. Nevertheless, the Americans decided to sell it to the
Dutch service at a huge discount. The antenna‘disappeared’in the USA and
the‘ G r a n g e r ’would finally end up in Eemnes. Nobody ever asked any
questions about how it came to be there in the first place or who paid for the
antenna. It was partly the American taxpayer. It was at the same time also a
clear message that the Netherlands Naval Intelligence Service preferred to
have close ties with their American naval counterparts and not so much with
the CIA.38 In 1972 there were in Eemnes three logperiodic antennas and
about five V-antennas. Eemnes was and still is a Sigint station dealing with
intercepting diplomatic and maritime HF traffic.

SIGINT AND I N D O N E S I A

The expansion of the TIVC in staff and technical capabilities continued
despite the fact the government refused to take care of proper finances for a
real growth of the organisation. In the 1950s the TIVC was probably most
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                   257
successful in decoding Indonesian diplomatic and military traffic. The
intercepts were partly done from New Guinea and were very rewarding. In
part the Dutch were helped by the simple fact that the Indonesian
government and military used the Hagelin cipher machine for their secure
communications.
    When in 1954 a rebellion broke out on various islands in Indonesia, the
Indonesian government in Djakarta simply forgot that the rebels captured
during the revolt many of these Hagelins. The Indonesian authorities did not
change or alter the settings of their Hagelins and the negligence in the end
produced quite staggering results for the Dutch codebreakers who managed
to get hold of some of these Hagelins. Only the keys sometimes produced
some minor problems. In view of the British and American involvement and
support of these Indonesian rebels one can take it for granted that the NSA
and GCHQ also obtained similar results. Actually, documentary proof of
such results by GCHQ can be found in the latest release by the NSA to the
National Archives in Washington DC. In the release of roughly more than
1.3 million pages of documents a researcher can find several GCHQ
intercepts of Indonesian political and military traffic.39
    These developments and codebreaking activities led to many Dutch
successes in this part of Asia. To give a few examples: in January 1959 more
than 1,000 enciphered telegrams were intercepted. By July 1959, this
number had risen to almost 2,200. At the height of the New Guinea crisis,
this number had gone up in January 1962 to almost 10,000 per month. This
sheer volume, a computer and excellent staff enabled the TIVC in
Amsterdam to break the Indonesian code in five weeks.40
    This huge number enabled the TIVC to read almost all Indonesian
diplomatic and military traffic. Apart from these cryptanalytic
accomplishments the TIVC was also quite successful because the
Netherlands Foreign Intelligence Service had recruited several high-ranking
spies within the Indonesian government. For example, within the
Indonesian delegation, which negotiated at Geneva in 1956 with the
Netherlands government about the transfer of the last colonial possession to
Indonesia, the Dutch service had recruited several agents. This major
intelligence undertaking was called Operation‘Virgil’and the recruitment
would even include the Indonesian foreign minister and other highly placed
officials in the Indonesian diplomatic and military community in Djakarta.
    These spies but also other recruited agents working at Indonesian
embassies and the Foreign Ministry in Djakarta itself proved to be very
valuable. They provided the clear text of many diplomatic telegrams, which
the Indonesian delegation during their complex negotiations with their
Dutch diplomatic counterparts exchanged with Djakarta. These clear texts
of course enabled the TIVC to decipher the still coded Indonesian messages.
258       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

It is probably safe to say that Indonesia as regards intentions and capabilities
did not harbour many secrets for the government.41 A fascinating topic and
quite successful intelligence story will be dealt with extensively by co-
author Wies Platje in the next contribution of this study. It is also a fine
example of how Sigint and Humint can be complementary.
     In this respect it is all the more peculiar that the government did not pour
more money into the TIVC. For in the 1950s and the start of the 1960s the
organisation had proven to be capable of delivering an excellent Sigint
product to the Dutch Cabinet and its diplomatic negotiators. But this did not
happen. On the contrary: simple typing and other administrative work at the
TIVC had to be done by trained cryptanalysts while their real intelligence
work sometimes came to a standstill. Many complaints by the Director of
the TIVC at the highest level at the Foreign Office were met with sympathy
but not with a substantial improvement in the overall situation.42 This was
very remarkable because in particular Foreign Minister Joseph Luns, who
later became Secretary-General of NATO, was very pleased with the
materials he received from Sigint.
     The conflict with Indonesia did however improve the contacts with the
Dutch foreign intelligence service, the IDB. The heads of TIVC and IDB
conferred several times and an agreement was reached. Greater
coordination was worked out and the Director of TIVC even agreed to share
his archives and documentation with the IDB. Interestingly enough is that
again as in the past this arrangement was executed without informing the
Director of Dutch Navy Intelligence, who was nominally responsible for the
TIVC.
     Spanjaard, as I mentioned before, a retired lieutenant colonel in the
Royal Netherlands Indies Army, also conducted secret negotiations with the
Dutch Army in order to improve the status of his TIVC but with no great
accomplishments. The formal cooperation with the BVD did not increase
either and remained also sparse.43 One insider who attended some of those
meetings dealing with expanded collaboration claimed that there were
simply no mutual fields of interest. The anxious interest by the TIVC in
cooperating with the Army and Air Force was, according to some sources,
mainly aimed in furthering the interests of the TIVC. It was exclusively
interested in using the intercept stations of both military Sigint units.44

THE I N T E L L I G E N C E L I A I S O N

There was also an attempt to start international cooperation and Comint
exchange. This was tried in the late 1950s with the British GCHQ but it led
to absolutely nothing. For example: the TIVC handed over to the British
Sigint service the Indonesian Air Force code, which the Dutch had broken.
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                       259
It of course expected to get something in return. However, GCHQ produced
nothing valuable: predominantly quite outdated material. When after
various complaints the British service did not produce more substantive
intelligence products, the Dutch Sigint service subsequently completely
broke off the exchange of documents.45 In later years this cooperation was
resumed.
    Apart from the successes against Indonesian targets more
accomplishments were achieved. The traditional Dutch political distrust of
the French national security policy in Western Europe led to another
operation. TIVC intercepted, on behalf of the Dutch Foreign Office, the
diplomatic traffic of the French embassy in The Hague to and from the
Quay d’Orsay in Paris for quite a long time. More than one official worked
full-time at the TIVC on these French ciphers and codes and there was even
a French chamber at the TIVC. Some sources even suggest that this was
done over a period of at least 20 years and perhaps even more. The French
codes were apparently not too difficult to decipher because the French
embassies used the same codes over a very long period of time. These
intercepts probably had already started in 1946 and continued until the late
1960s.46
    It was a similar operation, as was actually executed in more European
capitals such as London, to those Peter Wright revealed in his book
Spycatcher.47 Whether the TIVC or another Dutch intelligence or security
service gave any help or professional advice to GCHQ in this clandestine
eavesdropping intelligence operation is not known. However, the fact
indicates that these two Western European countries were particularly
suspicious of the French political intentions, in particular during the various
British bids to join the European Community (EC). The fact that Britain’s
entry into the EC was twice stopped by a French veto irritated the Dutch
government considerably and especially Netherlands Foreign Minister Luns
was often vexed about the French stance.48
    Spanjaard died in 1960 without having been able to get more substantial
funding for the TIVC. Nevertheless, he is regarded by many intelligence
professionals as the man who built up the service from scratch and who laid
in very difficult times a firm and sound basis for the TIVC. Only between
1960 and 1963 was more financial support given to the TIVC, which
enabled the organisation to buy additional intercept equipment, Siemens
printers, direction-finders and about 15 Racal receivers. Also 15 new
telegraphers formerly belonging to the Netherlands pilotage were
transferred to the TIVC.49
    At the time Spanjaard died there was more or less still no contacts
between the TIVC and the Sigint units of the Netherlands Army and Air
Force. The three military Sigint services each followed their own path.
260     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Again, this is not so strange in view of the fact that areas of interest and
potential and actual targets were quite different. Nonetheless, cooperation in
the field of Sigint was restored in 1969. In this year the working relationship
between these three elements doing the same kind of work was re-
established although quite carefully. The association of the TIVC with its
Dutch Air Force counterpart was also quite cautious. Although it officially
began in 1953 not much was achieved in the late 1950s.
    For this reason it was quite logical that the Dutch Air Force Sigint
service worked more closely together with its German counterpart than
with the TIVC. In 1967 for example an agreement was drafted which
established a regular albeit unofficial Netherlands-German exchange of
data, stemming from Sigint. In 1970 the cooperation with the German
Fernmelderegiment 70 was officially approved and formalised. And Dutch
Army Intelligence worked together with the German Bundesnachrichtendienst
(BND) and Army. This intelligence cooperation concentrated for example
on tracking down numerous burst transmitters in the German Democratic
Republic.50

LATIN A M E R I C A

However, the intercept activities of the TIVC were not limited to Asia,
Western and Eastern Europe. At the beginning of the 1960s the TIVC also
played an (albeit minor) role during the Cuban Missile Crisis in October
1962. An interesting detail in this respect emerged from the official British
archives. In a document dealing with a NATO Experts Working Group on
Latin America, which was held at the beginning of November 1962, officials
from the French intelligence community claimed that they had received an
indication in August 1962 of the presence of surface-to-surface missiles in
Cuba. However, officials from the Dutch intelligence community claimed
that they had already received similar evidence in September. From the
lengthy roundtable discussion it transpired that no other NATO member had
received any forewarnings of the upcoming crisis.51
    However, this valuable information came only partly from Sigint
because the Netherlands Military Intelligence Agency had a Humint source
in Cuba who checked the Sigint evidence. Soon the Humint reports came
back and it turned out that the Sigint was solid: another fine example of
Sigint and Humint sources working together. The source of the Netherlands
Military Intelligence Agency also reported the arrival of Soviet bomber and
transport aircraft in Havana. Nevertheless, probably this time it was the Air
Force Sigint unit, which had eavesdropped on Soviet military traffic in the
German Democratic Republic. It discovered the movement and subsequent
transfer of Soviet military advisers and equipment to Cuba.
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                       261

    However, there was probably also another Dutch service involved. The
BVD monitored all conversations by phone to and from the Cuban embassy
in The Hague. It is reasonable to assume that likewise the Cuban diplomatic
telex and telegraph connections were monitored. One day a Cuban diplomat
did read out loudly on the phone in Spanish the plaintext of a coded
diplomatic telegram. On the other end of the line another Cuban diplomat
listened and compared also in Spanish the plaintext with the cipher text. An
easier instance of an open goal could not be envisaged.
    The Cuban cipher was broken in this simple manner. The Cuban
conversation on the phone was clearly one of the biggest violations of
communication security ever heard of. The BVD forwarded this material
quickly to the CIA station chief in The Hague, the late Dr Cleveland Cram,
who was posted to the Netherlands from 1966 to 1970. The BVD did not
tell Cram how they were able to break the Cuban diplomatic code. A few
weeks later the NSA via CIA channels told the BVD jokingly that they
really had to stop these kind of activities because it turned out that they had
a 100 per cent score. All NSA personnel‘would lose their j o b ’if the BVD
continued with these kind of excellent codebreaking activities. The BVD
had also immediately forwarded the results of their codebreaking operation
to the TIVC but there this material was hardly appreciated and for unknown
reasons not much enthusiasm was shown.52
    In this respect presumably the Dutch listening post in the Netherlands
Antilles (West Indies) did not play an active role in this phase. The main
reason for this was the following. There were indeed intercept facilities in
the Netherlands Antilles in the Caribbean. From a site on the island of
Curaçao in particular a country like Venezuela but also other Latin
American and Caribbean nations were monitored constantly. This site had
been operational since World War II but became more actively involved in
intercepting traffic after 1945. In the beginning the Venezuelan intercepts
were forwarded to Amsterdam for decryption but this did not turn out to be
a success. The intercepting activities were not executed on a frequent basis
and soon the intercepts did not produce a breakthrough in the sense that the
military codes and ciphers of Venezuela were broken, a success the
forerunner had already accomplished during World War II. After 1956, most
personnel were withdrawn from Curaçao in order to help out in the conflict
with Indonesia.
    However, in 1957 it was the British GCHQ at Cheltenham, which asked
the TIVC if they were willing to establish a permanent listening site at the
island of Curaçao. The British intelligence service informed the Dutch that
there was a hiatus in their Sigint network, which operated within the
UKUSA agreement. In this arrangement which dates from 1947 the United
States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand entered into a
262     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

treaty that created a network of security and Sigint cooperation that
continues to this day. Nearly 30 years passed before any participating
government acknowledged the existence of this agreement.53
    As many readers will know by now: UKUSA nowadays plays an
important role in the Echelon and other global eavesdropping networks. The
British request for Sigint collaboration was a unique chance for the Dutch
to try for closer cooperation with the UKUSA countries. However, lack of
funds and staff made the Dutch decline the request by GCHQ. In retrospect
the drafters of the official internal TIVC history acknowledged that an
excellent opportunity had been missed to begin some sort of collaboration
with the UKUSA nations. It was observed that this would undoubtedly have
been very valuable in international crisis situations.54
    After the conflict with New Guinea had ended the Director of Dutch
Naval Intelligence decided to dispatch a small staff to the island of Curaçao
in order to step up the eavesdropping activities. In January 1963, a Sigint
team of seven persons was transferred to the Caribbean island. It was to
target Venezuela. In June 1963 a second team was sent and after finishing
their assignment it was reported that from Curaçao the military traffic of all
three Venezuelan armed forces could be easily intercepted with excellent
results. Venezuela was worthwhile monitoring because of its sizeable armed
forces and closeness to the last Dutch colonial possessions in the Caribbean.
Also the aspirations of Venezuela with respect to the continental shelf were
of importance because this area was quite rich in oil. Operations were
mounted from the listening post Saint Joris, which worked in 1982 with
nine Racal monitor-receivers and six Racal search-receivers.55
    Helped by the TIVC the Dutch government was well informed about the
plans of the government in Venezuela. The TIVC was thus able to keep the
Cabinet well informed about the military order of battle in this region of
Latin America.56 According to various well-informed sources and released
documents the military traffic of other Latin American countries apparently
also posed no problem for the Dutch codebreakers. Plans were made to
station a permanent interception group of one officer and a staff of 18 on
Curaçao. A budget of almost 600,000 Dutch guilders was also proposed. The
under-secretary of the Navy approved the plan and it was decided that all
efforts would concentrate on Venezuela.57 In addition it should be mentioned
that the CIA also ran its own Sigint station on the Dutch island of Curaçao.
    Furthermore, the Dutch Army began in 1963 its Sigint operations from
Surinam soil. The Comint operations were in particular aimed at issues
related to the political developments in British Guyana. Between 1963 and
1966 various political questions produced increased Comint activities from
Surinam soil like the activities of Soviet spy trawlers off the coast of
Surinam and the independence struggle in British Guyana. In this British
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                      263
colony there were still British troops stationed until the country became
independent on 23 May 1965. Netherlands and British armed forces
cooperated in this period.
    From 1967 onwards the tension between Surinam (still a Dutch colony)
and British Guyana heightened because of a territorial border dispute.
Consequently the Sigint activities from Surinam directed against Guyana
were stepped up. Additional Sigint equipment, analysts, translators and
technicians were flow in. Guyana remained the main target until 1975.
    Sigint was hereafter also used at length to monitor the smuggling
activities in the jungle of Surinam. Successes were soon accomplished and
a international smugglers syndicate was rolled up because their codes were
broken by the Netherlands military eavesdroppers in Surinam. The
cooperation with other Sigint services (particularly the US) expanded and
this led among others on the basis of Dutch Sigint to the arrest of a spy from
a Warsaw Pact country who worked on Cape Canaveral (presently the
Kennedy Space Centre) in Florida. However, the frequent attacks on Soviet
Navy codes and ciphers did not produce that much success. The Sigint unit
of the Netherlands Army in this colony operated until the independence of
Surinam and finally returned in 1975 to the Netherlands.58

F I N A N C I A L P R O B L E M S STILL UNRESOLVED

However, the history of the TIVC, which until now has been portrayed as
reasonably successful, had also a darker side. It is a shadow, which has been
hanging over the service from the start. It is the simple question: who is
going to pay for its activities, very expensive equipment and its
experienced, well educated and trained staff? The financial budget for the
TIVC grew from more than 172,000 guilders in 1947 to almost 400,000
guilders in 1948. In 1950, the Minister for the Navy wrote to the Prime
Minister and Minister of the Treasury that his department was no longer
able to pay all the costs involved. He wanted a cost sharing arrangement
because the main bulk of the TIVC output went to the Foreign and Cabinet
Offices. A basic element in these discussions was of course always: should
one department charge another for the product it delivered. Probably to this
day this is still an unresolved issue in the Netherlands intelligence
community. As a Sigint analyst told me privately: ‘It is a cumbersome topic
nobody likes to talk about. It is a dead issue.’59
    The Ministry of Foreign Affairs as well as the Department of Trade
claimed constantly that other intelligence and security services like the
BVD or IDB also delivered their intelligence products but never charged
any money for it. Although all departments realised the importance of the
Sigint product: there was no willingness to pay for it. And although the
264     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Treasury Department promised to increase the overall yearly budget of the
Royal Dutch Navy with an extra 500,000 guilders this pledge never
materialised. In the meantime, in 1952 the annual budget had grown to a
mere 500,000 Dutch guilders per year.
    In 1956 the debate about finances was reopened but to no avail. The
Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Department of
Trade refused to contribute 100,000 guilders each. Finally, in 1957 the
Cabinet decided that the National Telecommunications Board would fund a
part of the overall budget of the TIVC. A steady albeit marginal increase of
the budget would from now on take place on a yearly basis. The Directors
of the TIVC were of course not pleased, but there was no alternative. The
various recipients of the TIVC eavesdropping intelligence product simply
refused to pay for it. In 1965 the proposed budget had risen to 2.6 million
guilders a year. The biggest chunk went to salaries: 1.9 million, which was
four times as much compared to 1950/52. This rise of the annual budget was
no surprise in view of all earlier achievements and successes in Europe and
Asia and the new operations in the Netherlands Antilles.60

NEW TARGETS

In the 1960s, after the transfer of New Guinea to Indonesia, the TIVC had
to concentrate their efforts on new targets although Indonesia and its
military remained an important object of study. For example, between 1965
and 1969, a part of the intercept capacity was tasked to monitor all
Indonesian diplomatic and military traffic. After two weeks the traffic and
transmitting schedules and times of all Indonesian embassies were mapped
out. In view of the huge earlier successes in breaking the Indonesian
diplomatic and military traffic either via codebreaking or the use of high-
ranking spies it is beyond doubt that again much of the Indonesian traffic
was read. One should not forget that Operation‘Virgil’was still producing
excellent results.61
    Of course, the year 1965 was important in view of the political and
military developments in Indonesia when in the night of 30 September and
1 October 1965, an abortive coup d’état took place when the Communist
Party tried to remove the government of Sukarno. The attempt failed but
sealed the fate of President Sukarno who in 1967 was replaced by General
Suharto. It is also safe to assume that the Dutch codebreaking results were
shared with the Americans and British although by that time the NSA and
GCHQ had probably no problem at all in deciphering the Indonesian
diplomatic and military traffic.
    In the same period the TIVC enlarged the targeting of the Middle East
and by 1965 it started to monitor all radio teletype traffic dealing with the
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                       265

movements of Egyptian ships. This information was shared with Israel and
was probably used by the Israelis in 1967 during the war in the Middle East.
Other targets were the Turkish diplomatic and military traffic, which was
intercepted and decoded successfully. Also traffic from Somalia, which
began to follow a Moscow-oriented political course, was successfully read.
    As said before, in these years also the cooperation of the TIVC with the
Sigint units of the Netherlands Army and Air Force did not improve
considerably because there was no real need to. Actually, in the mid-1960s
the Army Signals Intelligence Service was doing well and was capable of
monitoring the movements of troops on the night of 20 and 21 August 1968
when the Warsaw Pact invaded Czechoslovakia. These reports were the first
and the intelligence was immediately forwarded to the HQ Army
Intelligence. However, this service for unknown reasons decided not to pass
on this crucial information to the other intelligence services, which later of
course led to a huge internal discord.62
    Another problem was the interception of the traffic by telex. The Royal
Mail (Dutch PTT) and BVD did this kind of interception by ministerial
authorisation. The cover name for this was Operation‘Codeword 231’. In
the first part of the 1970s the PTT used two telexes for the registration of
intercepted messages. That was not enough, according to various
intelligence and security service sources. They wanted to expand this
number from 2 to roughly 20. At the beginning of the 1970s, Prime Minister
Barend Biesheuvel had authorised the interception of this traffic by telex.
However, in 1976 the PTT demanded a new authorisation to continue this
intelligence work from the newly elected Social Democratic government
led by Joop den Uyl. The whole affair was discussed in the ministerial
intelligence committee of the Cabinet in 1976. The intelligence coordinator
argued in favour of expansion. The services wanted two intercept telexes for
Warsaw Pact traffic and three telexes for the Middle East and North African
countries to choose from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia. They also wanted two telexes for European countries such as
Portugal, Spain, Italy and Turkey, and three telexes for Africa and the rest
of the world.
    Another problem, which was raised in this special ministerial
intelligence committee of the Cabinet, was the request for cooperation by
the American National Security Agency (NSA) and the West German
Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND). There was already some sort of
collaboration with the BND but not on the official level. Both services had
discreetly inquired if the Dutch Sigint services were not willing to officially
exchange intercepts. Various Dutch ministers in this special intelligence
committee had some doubts because if they concurred with this request the
Netherlands were admitting in that case that they were quite active in the
266     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

field of Sigint. This was of course quite a silly argument because the
ministers involved apparently still had the impression that the foreign
services had until that day not noticed these intelligence activities.
However, in the NATO framework it was widely known that the Dutch
Sigint capabilities and cryptanalytical know-how plus equipment were
indeed very good. The coordinator for this reason held a strong plea for an
expansion and this had to begin with sharing of intelligence. A chance that
the whole intelligence sharing operation would be compromised could be
overlooked in his view.
    The coordinator informed the ministers involved that security measures
and a good compartmentalisation would prevent this. All intercepted
messages in which Dutch citizens were mentioned by their real name were
delivered to the BVD. The intercepts, in which foreigners were mentioned,
were distributed to the BVD, IDB and Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The
TIVC in principle solely documented topics and issues: not persons. All
diplomatic and political-economic intercepts would be delivered via the
IDB to the Foreign Office and BVD. Purely economic intercepts would go
to the Ministry of Economic Affairs. The special committee of the Cabinet
gave thereupon the definite green light.63

THE OIL CRISIS OF 1973

The 1970s was an era in which more and more traffic was sent through
communication satellites. Accordingly, apart from Project Codeword 231
an enormous operation began. This time with the cover name: Project
Codeword 631. At Burum in the province of Friesland the Dutch Royal
Mail (PTT) established a satellite ground station for transmitting and
receiving via regular satellite communication traffic sent by phone, telex
and telegraph. However, unknown to the outside world was the
simultaneous establishment of a relay station, which forwarded a part of the
telegraph traffic passing through Burum to a TIVC unit where the intercepts
were stored in a computer. In this machine messages were sorted out and
later transferred by landline to the TIVC in Amsterdam. However,
employees of the PTT and in particular its director-general, were utterly
unhappy with these eavesdropping activities. They wanted to get rid of it.
The Radio Intelligence Committee (RIC) proposed to the Special
Intelligence Committee of the Dutch Cabinet that the PTT would no longer
execute this operation on behalf of the TIVC. The Sigint organisation would
have to perform this in the future. This was also common practice in Britain,
the United States and other Western European nations.
    The PTT was very pleased with this proposal by the RIC. In 1980 the
PTT proposed to give a satellite dish and receiver with which the TIVC
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                                                  267
                                                       FIGURE 8.2
                   SECRET TARGETS FOR DUTCH SIGINT, JANUARY 1981


                                                   GEHEIM

                                                                                       29/HR/81
                                                                                       d.d. 19/1/81


 Aan: H-WKC
 Van: H-IDB
 Betreft: Onderwerpen van belangs telling




 A. Europa


     1.    Oostbloklanden
           a. Reacties van Oosteuropese landen op de o n t w i k k e l i n g e n i n Polen
               (van p a r t i j / r e g e r i n g , vakbonden, b e v o l k i n g ) .
           b. Economische steunmaatregelen voor Polen en de consequenties daar-
               van voor de eigen economie. (Hoe worden eventuele t e k o r t e n opge-
               vangen?)
           c. Buitenlandse handel van Oosteuropese landen ( o n d e r l i n g en met
               westerse l a n d e n ) .


      2.    Albanië
            a. Economische en politieke contacten met Joegoslavië.
            b. Wijzigingen in de buitenlandse betrekkingen en handelscontacten
               met vooral kleinere Westeuropese landen.


      3. Bulgarije
            a. Relaties met Joegoslavië (Macedonische kwestie).
            b. Relaties met net Midden-Oosten (met name met Libië op het gebied van
                kernenergie en militaire samenwerking met Irak, Algerije).
            c. Wapenleveranties aan Zuid-Afrika?


       4. C.S.S.R.
          a. Dissidente groeperingen.
          b. Rol bij de produktie van kerncentrales in de Comecon.


          5. D.D.R.
             a. Verhouding partij/kerken.
             b. D u i t s - D u i t s e betrekkingen.
             c. Betrekkingen met Afrikaanse landen en Cuba.
             d . A c t i v i t e i t e n i n het Midden-Oosten.

                                                    GEHEIM
268        SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                                   FIGURE 8.2




      BIJIAGE 2


           Belangstelling voor TIVC berichten.

           I. Volgens IDB vraagstelling (vide 86/CF/86)

      1.   Handelspolitieke info in de meest uitgebreide zin over SU en Comecon
           partners.

      2.   Handels- en b e t a l i n g s p o l i t i e k van:



      3.   Financiële t r a n s a c t i e s van                             met:


      4.   Mogelijkheden voor Nederlandse bedrijfsleven t o t participeren in de
           u i t v o e r i n g van “ g r o t e m i l i t a i r e p r o d u k t i e p r o j e c t e n ” ,


      5.   Tenderinfo t . b . v . b e d r i j v e n met zgn. “monopolistische p o s i t i e ” in de
           categorie: telefoon
                         luchtvaart
                         vliegtuigbouw
                         militaire scheepsbouw
                         civiele scheepsbouw
                         militaire electronische apparatuur

      I I . Aanvul lingen volgens opgave d i r e c t i e Operaties

      1.   A a n n e m i n g s p r o j e c t e n (havens, c i v i e l e scheepsbouw, c o n s u l t a n c y ,
           vliegvelden, pijpleidingen, waterbouwkunde en i r r i g a t i e , leverantie
           c o n s t r u c t i e m a t e r i a a l ) in Midden Oosten

           Bedrijven:



      2. Petrochemie (olie–gas en verwerking) en methanolprojecten (ureum,
         kunstmest) in M.Oosten

           Bedrijven:




                                                       1



                                                  VERTROUWELIJK
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                                                                       269
                                                      FIGURE 8.2



                                                       VERTROUWELIJK

    3.    C h e m i e / m e d i s c h e a p p a r a t u u r en u i t r u s t i n g e n ( p u l s e g e n e r a t o r s ,
          pacemakers, l e v e r a n t i e chemicaliën) van



    4.    A g r a r i s c h e p r o j e c t e n en handel i n a g r a r i s c h e produkten ( z u i v e l ,
          p o o t a a r d a p p e l e n , b i o - i n d u s t r i e ) i n M. Oosten                    en
          Afrika

     5.   E l e c t r o n i c a , communicatie- en c o m p u t e r a p p a r a t u u r


          6. Financiële- en handelstransacties (kredietfaciliteiten, bankberichten)
          over



     7.   M i l i t a i r e p r o j e c t e n en handel in m i l , goederen                        (explosieven,
          beveiligingssystemen) naar

     8.   Narcoticahandel m.b.t.

     9.   Terroristische activiteiten m.b.t. M.Oosten, Oost Europa, Car. gebied,
          Azië.

     10. “Personeelswerving” voor M. Oosten

     11. Nieuwe en toeristische projecten




could intercept the traffic which was transmitted by satellite. The Cabinet
readily agreed with this idea. The IDB also became more actively involved
and a direct hotline was created using a secure landline between the TIVC
in Amsterdam and the headquarters of the IDB in The Hague. Raw
intercepts were passed along to the IDB and it started to weave this material
into its finished intelligence products. At the same time the IDB also passed
along to the TIVC specific requirements regarding the targets they wanted
Sigint on.64
    However, the PTT wanted to sever its ties with the TIVC completely and
was very willing to give the Sigint service a huge financial alimony
payment if they were willing to agree to a divorce. The TIVC would receive
enough money to build its own satellite intercept site at Zoutkamp in the
northern Netherlands in the province of Groningen, a site close to Burum
with excellent intercept conditions. This intercept station, also known as
Project Codeword 632, would begin commence its intercept operations in
270     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

1983. The Cabinet Office and the Ministries of Defence, Trade and
Transportation paid the roughly 4 million guilders needed to build this site.
It was planned to build this site up to a full Satellite Interception System
(Project Codename‘Delta’). The funds for the first phase (roughly 700,000
Dutch guilders) were available for this operation. The money for the second
and third phases for the years 1987–89 was estimated in 1985 to be roughly
6 million.65
    It is claimed that this satellite interception site was able to search with a
computerised dictionary through roughly 20,000 messages every 24 hours,66
going through and scanning the intercepted traffic by using the keyword
search method. These keywords could of course vary and were actually
changed on a daily basis. Nevertheless, the keywords dealt mainly with
political, military but also economic, technical, non-proliferation, narcotic
and scientific related matters. For example, using these entries and
keywords information was sought dealing with nuclear, biological and
chemical proliferation and missile technology.67

                                   FIGURE 8.3
                    DUTCH SATELLITE INTERCEPT STATION
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                      271
    Not only great results were achieved in the 1960s but also in the 1970s.
According to reliable sources, the TIVC was exploiting in
September/October 1973 the whole communication network of the
Egyptian Navy as well as the Egyptian Air Force. This information was
undoubtedly shared with Israel. According to a former employee of the
Mossad, the IDB even warned Israel, on the basis of intercepts, about the
upcoming Arab offensive a few days before war broke out. However, these
and other warnings were tossed aside by Israel. Was this on purpose or is
that too far fetched? What is interesting is that Israeli Prime Minister Golda
Meir in November 1973 spoke at length to the Leaders Conference of the
Socialistic International. Dutch Prime Minister Den Uyl was present at this
meeting. He later told one of his trusted personal national security advisers
that Golda Meir had informed secretly him that she had been aware of the
upcoming attack 15 hours before it actually took place. The government of
Israel had considered launching a pre-emptive strike against Egypt and
Syria but decided against such a military move.68
    A primary recipient of intelligence derived from Sigint was thus in those
days Israel. During the October 1973 war the Dutch services tipped off their
Israeli counterparts about telephone and telex cables on the seabed of the
Mediterranean between Egypt and Libya. An elite Israeli unit succeeded in
blowing up this cable, which forced the Egyptians and Libyans to rely on
radio links. The relationship with the Mossad was actually very intimate
because the IDB also gave the Israeli services raw intercepts from certain
Arab embassies in The Hague. Mossad was in particular looking for traffic
to and from representatives of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation
(PLO). And in a black bag operation, the IDB also opened an Arabic
diplomatic mailbag. They made copies of the original diplomatic telegrams
and these materials were given to the Mossad. This enabled this service to
compare the raw Sigint with the original telegrams and considerably
enhanced the chances of deciphering the Arabic codes. However, repeated
requests by Israel to forward intercepts of traffic of French diplomatic and
military authorities were constantly refused. On the other hand, the Mossad
was given intercepts of traffic between German, Italian and French
companies and various Arab capitals in the Middle East. These intercepts
dealt with the export and sale of weapons and the technology needed to
produce weapons. Special Mossad couriers flew over from Paris to collect
this important intelligence.69
    The TIVC was in these years very successful against Middle Eastern
targets and broke the diplomatic codes of many Arab nations. Based on
intercepts, the TIVC at a very early stage could inform the Dutch Cabinet
that a decision to impose an oil embargo against the Netherlands and in
particular Rotterdam had been taken already in July 1973. This was
272     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

confirmed by a report from the Dutch national security service, BVD, which
was sent in November 1973 to the Dutch intelligence tsar and coordinator,
Admiral Frits Kruimink. The leaders of the major political Dutch parties
were discreetly informed of this fact in a closed session of the Parliamentary
Intelligence Committee.
    The intelligence services did have a pretty good picture of the oil supply
situation because the TIVC could also read the coded messages of Royal
Dutch Shell, British Petroleum, Mobil Oil and various other oil companies.
All multinationals in the oil sector used very primitive codes which were
very easy to decipher. Actually, this situation did not pertain solely to the
Netherlands. Also the NSA received in those days much intelligence
derived from intercepts of communications from the major American oil
companies. The President-director of Shell, G. A. Wagner, was warned by
the Dutch intelligence community of this lapse in security several times.
However, not much changed. Wagner was told over and over again that not
only other Western services but also the Soviets and other East European
services were able to read the codes of Shell because they were so easy to
break. Shell was asked several times to do something about this and to
improve the codes. Nevertheless, the situation would remain the same and
enabled the TIVC to deliver the confirmation that there were ample oil
stocks for six months available in Rotterdam harbour and in fact the
Netherlands was flooded with oil.70
    Accordingly, the TIVC played an important role during the oil crisis. In
those days the TIVC devoted 15 per cent of its resources on the Middle East
but because of sufficient analyses and research this 15 per cent capacity
could be expanded quite quickly. The TIVC did for example break the
Tunisian diplomatic code and the reports of the Tunisian embassy in
Damascus, Syria, one of the nations at war with Israel, was an important
source of information for the Dutch government.71 Everyday a special
Middle East edition full of intercepts was distributed by the TIVC to the
members of the Dutch Cabinet. The Dutch government was well informed
about the political and military developments in the Middle East because in
a war situation most of the time no ciphers or codes were used by many
parties. This pertained to Israel, the Arab nations but also for the Soviets.
Much was‘ r e a d ’like for example non-encrypted Soviet military traffic to
and from Yugoslavia and because of this the Russian linguists at TIVC
discovered much about the Soviet deliveries of arms via Yugoslavia to the
Arab nations. From Sigint much was also learned about the Arab operations
and Soviet strategy and the location of various military units.72
    Apart from this, Middle Eastern and Soviet, the diplomatic traffic about
the crisis produced by various European countries was also intercepted and
read by the Dutch Sigint services. In later years, Dutch Sigint material,
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                      273
which was forwarded to Israel contained excellent information about the
Iraqi nuclear reactor at Osirak. The problem was not so much the location
of the reactor: this was already known by the Israelis from aerial
reconnaissance and satellite pictures. The difficulty was more how much
concrete (with or without steel?) had Iraq used in the construction of the
reactor. The vital information was needed by the Israeli Air Force in order
to determine which bombs to use. This information was collected in 1981
by the TIVC from the Italian companies who built the reactor because those
firms used open communications, which could be intercepted.73

RECURRENT FINANCIAL PROBLEMS

Nevertheless, despite all successes during the oil embargo of 1973–74 the
problem of which ministry would finance the TIVC was still not solved in
this period. Only 30 per cent of the output of the TIVC went in those days
to the Dutch Navy although insiders maintain that it was often very difficult
to achieve this percentage.74 The remainder went to the Cabinet Office and
Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Trade, Treasury and other departments in The
Hague. The numerous attempts by the Royal Dutch Navy to have the real
customers pay for the intelligence product would still continue to fall upon
deaf ears. A yearly subsidy by the National Telecommunication Board in
the 1970s to the Ministry of Defence of 500,000 guilders was only a meagre
contribution. On the other hand various departments also explicitly forbade
scaling down the activities of the TIVC because the quality and results
would diminish quite fast. It was indeed a vicious circle from which an
escape did not seem possible.
    This problem had also been discussed in October 1976 in the special
intelligence committee of the Cabinet. Minister of Foreign Affairs, Max van
der Stoel, who profited enormously from the Sigint take during the oil crisis,
was of course in favour of the continuation of the Sigint efforts of the TIVC.
However, Prime Minister Den Uyl was less enthusiastic. He was concerned
about the enormous costs and the payments made to the hundreds of
employees. On a yearly basis roughly 30 million guilders would go to the
TIVC. Actually, the total costs of the TIVC were estimated in 1985 to
amount between 50 and 100 million guilders per year.75 In 1992 an article in
a newspaper even estimated that the TIVC was costing roughly 150 million
guilders on a yearly basis.76
     However, these financial figures are probably far too high, and deal in
all likelihood with investments and not with operational costs. For example,
it was claimed in an official publication that in 1977 the yearly TIVC budget
was about 10 million guilders, which is significantly less than earlier
estimates in the press.77 However, the overall cost is probably much higher
274     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

because this figure includes only the salaries, operational costs and finances
involved in acquiring equipment.78 Financial figures for later years remain
obscure because the real figures are hidden in the overall budget of the
Ministry of Defence. Hopefully new research and future Freedom of
Information Act requests will shed some more light on this financial aspect.
    Apart from this, the doubts of the Prime Minister were reinforced by the
fact that the Sigint reporting was rather raw, sometimes unbalanced because
the TIVC did not produce any finished analytic intelligence products based
on intercepts. The coordinator could only agree with the Prime Minister.
However, this was not quite fair because the TIVC was only responsible for
collecting Sigint and not responsible for the overall analysis of the Sigint.
This had to be done by the IDB. Nevertheless, the coordinator himself had
compared the costs against the benefits and had likewise concluded that this
was a negative balance sheet. However, he assured the Prime Minister that
he had ordered an increased cooperation between the various Sigint
services. More analysis had to be done and less raw intelligence had to be
delivered to the intelligence customers.79

P R O J E C T‘ M O R E ’ AND SIGINT LIAISON

These fresh instructions by the intelligence coordinator were presumably the
outcome of the October 1973 crisis, during which the Army Sigint unit had
also produced excellent results. In 1976, roughly 125 staff was attached to
the TIVC, 360 to the Army Sigint unit and about 100 to the Air Force Sigint
unit. The number for the Army Sigint Unit is of course higher because many
military personnel were involved in tactical and strategic military Sigint
work. The staff of the TIVC did not grow spectacularly. In 1990 the number
of staff of TIVC had increased to a mere 135. Nonetheless, increased
cooperation would only really start in 1987 when the three Armed Forces
services merged into a single Defence Intelligence Agency. In 1988/89 the
HF intercept station at Eemnes became somewhat outdated and it was
proposed to replace it with a brand new station which would cost the Dutch
taxpayer an amount of 40 million Dutch guilders over a period of eight years.
This operation was named internally Project Codeword‘MORE’.80 Actually,
the word MORE was the abbreviation for‘Modernisation Radiostation
Eemnes’. This project was completed around 1991/92.
    Finally, with whom was this intelligence internationally shared? The
intelligence derived from Sigint was primarily shared with the United States
and Britain. In the beginning the TIVC did not share its intelligence with the
CIA. Rather everything went to the US Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI).
This was done because the naval intelligence unit of the CIA was not to be
considered as the most ideal partner in the field of intelligence liaison. This
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                     275

unit often produced low quality information contrary to what ONI provided
to Dutch Navy Intelligence. However, as a former Dutch Naval Intelligence
official told me, this situation pertained to the period 1950–80.
    After 1980 apparently much finished intelligence based on intercepts
from the TIVC was customarily shared with the CIA. This happened several
times a week. In particular when on the basis of intercepts the Dutch
discovered that some sources or agents of the CIA in foreign countries were
in acute danger. This kind of life saving information was also shared with
for example the Mossad and in this manner an assassination of two Mossad
agents in France by a Palestinian terrorist group was prevented. It was
thwarted because the intelligence derived from Sigint was given urgently to
the Israelis.
    The relationship of the TIVC with the CIA became much better when
William O. (Bill) Studeman went from ONI to the NSA and later became
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (DDCI) at the CIA. From that
moment on, the access of the Dutch service to the top of the CIA was very
easy. There was also formal cooperation with NSA and Agency officials
who visited the Netherlands on a frequent basis. One of the most recent
visits was that of Deputy Director Barbara McNamara late in 1999 only a
month before she was transferred to London. During the visit of McNamara
the topic of increased American-Dutch Sigint cooperation regarding the
Netherlands Antilles was discussed. Apparently an agreement was drafted
on this subject. Also joint operations were executed. In 1979 a frigate from
the Royal Netherlands Navy visited the Barents Sea and the vessel carried
American Comint operators on board trained for eavesdropping on Soviet
communications and military traffic in the high north.81
    The relationship with the British services never reached the same level
of intensity and depth compared to the US. For example, during the
Falklands War (1982) the TIVC was intercepting Argentine traffic from the
eavesdropping site Eemnes. The Argentine military forces had increased the
power of their military radio networks because they wanted to be sure that
all Argentine military forces would receive the messages. For this reason it
was no problem at all to follow the Argentine traffic from Eemnes.
However, the Dutch were of course not the only ones intercepting this
traffic. Also other intelligence services like the German BND were reading
this Argentine traffic. Nevertheless, one day, information based on
deciphered Argentine intercepts dealing with a downed British pilot was
quickly forwarded to the Chief of Station of the British foreign intelligence
service, MI6, in The Hague. With a reddish face he had to confess that
GCHQ had already the same information.82
    Actually, it turned out that GCHQ was pretty unprepared for an
Argentine invasion of the Falklands. Although GCHQ was able to decrypt
276     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the Argentine diplomatic and military traffic the Sigint service was unable
to analyse the enormous amount of intercepts that suddenly poured in.
There were also not sufficient linguists available to handle the extra
workload. Also MI6 was unprepared. For example, the handbook Latin
America of MI6 was updated for the last time in 1972! It appears that the
British intelligence community had practically nothing on the Argentine
military forces and the Falklands.83
    Also within the framework of NATO important information derived
from Sigint was shared with the Western allies. For example: on the basis of
traffic analyses Dutch Sigint was able in the early 1980s to predict a buildup
for a future Soviet invasion of Poland, which luckily never took place.
Nonetheless, these messages produced long and hectic nights at the desks of
the various Dutch intelligence and security services and at NATO
headquarters in Brussels and Mons. The main problem remained of course
the decipherment of Soviet, Warsaw Pact and Chinese diplomatic and
military traffic. This was too difficult for the TIVC, which was the sole
service doing the cryptanalytic work in Holland. The Sigint units of the
Army and Air Force were not involved in any codebreaking activities. Less
difficult in the 1980s was the traffic of many countries in the Middle East
including Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.
    That the TIVC did read the diplomatic traffic of the latter country was
revealed in an article in the Dutch weekly Vrij Nederland on 9 September
1978. In the article it was disclosed that the Sigint service was reading the
diplomatic traffic between the embassy of Iran in The Hague and Tehran. It
was also exposed that the police cooperated with the embassy of Iran in
tracking down Iranian students and dissidents living in the Netherlands. It
was primarily students who protested on a frequent basis against the harsh
policy of suppression by the Shah of Iran. With this capacity the TIVC
probably could also monitor and read the other encrypted Iranian diplomatic
exchanges. Vrij Nederland printed the original intercepted coded message
as well as the translation. This article led to an enormous row inside the
TIVC and a molehunt began led by the military police. Although suspicions
centred on a certain person working at the TIVC who probably leaked this
very sensitive information to the press, an arrest and subsequent trial never
materialised.84


SIGINT AND NATO

In later years the exchange of purely military intelligence took place within
completely new frameworks such as the NATO Advisory Committee for
Special Intelligence (NACSI) and the Signals Intelligence Data System,
which was abbreviated as SYGDASIS.85 Originally it was some sort of
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                     277
computerised back-up system in case one of the nations lost its national
Sigint capacity. Within this framework the Sigint cooperation took place in
the so-called multinational SYGDASYS committee. From the start the
sharing of entirely military intelligence took place on a quid pro quo basis.
All nations involved poured into SYGDASYS as much military Sigint and
other information as possible. Each nation could present its requirements
which, however, meant that this also at the same time showed its strengths
and weaknesses.
    More important was that the enormous overlap in targeting slowly
disappeared. SYGDASYS played an important role during the Gulf crisis of
1990–91. However, the US wanted to involve more countries in
SYGDASYS, which led to some panic among NATO allies. They did not
trust some of the Arab friends of the United States and of course, a kind of
mutiny also started in Israel.
    SYGDASYS also had a regional database system, which specialised on
certain areas. The members of the SYGDASIS committee had to report to
the Sigint Senior Meetings (SSMs) in which all heads of Sigint
organisations were represented like NSA, BND, GCHQ, DGSE, the Italian
SISMI, the Norwegian Military Intelligence Service, the Danish Defence
Intelligence Service, the Belgian Military Intelligence Service, etc. The
chairman of the SYGDASIS committee did this reporting. The Director of
the MID (often accompanied by the Director of the TIVC) was always in a
strong position in these meetings of the Sigint Senior Meetings because he
could trade off strategic and tactical Sigint. The exchange of acoustic
intelligence was done in a separate framework.
    Sweden was probably discreetly informed of the decisions in the Sigint
Senior Meetings by the American services and/or other participants.
However, the Swedes were always quite sensitive in these kinds of contacts.
For example, they always travelled in plain clothes and always wanted the
lowest profile possible. All the same, Swedish Sigint officers from the
Försvarsväsendets Radioanstalt (FRA), or National Defence Radio
Institute visited the Netherlands for discussions with their Dutch
counterparts on a regular basis.86
    However, the diplomatic traffic of several NATO allies with embassies
in The Hague, which was intercepted and deciphered by the TIVC over a
longer period of time, was not shared. In conversations and articles the
Belgian diplomatic traffic is an example often mentioned. The Dutch
Ministry of Foreign Affairs always had certain doubts as regards the future
political orientation of Brussels. From intercepts of the Belgian diplomatic
traffic to and from The Hague and other capitals much more was discovered
about the Belgian intentions. Various other countries apart from Belgium
were also monitored like Italy and Turkey.87
278     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Because the traffic of the Soviet, Chinese and Warsaw Pact embassies was
difficult to decipher, it was all the more interesting to read the traffic of
various foreign Western European embassies and consulates behind the Iron
Curtain and in China. The TIVC concentrated on diplomatic missions of
nations, whose traffic it could read. For instance, the BVD was interested in
reading the diplomatic reporting of the Italian embassy in Moscow. The visits
of prominent Italian Communists and PCI members to Moscow often turned
out to be great ideological and political disappointments. These frustrations
by Italian Communists were quite frequently uttered to Italian diplomats at the
Italian embassy in Moscow who in turn forwarded this to the Italian Foreign
Ministry in Rome. The TIVC intercepted and read this Italian diplomatic
traffic, giving the BVD an excellent insight into the latest developments in the
European Communist world. Of course, officials at the Netherlands Ministry
of Foreign Affairs were also pleased because the diplomatic reporting of
foreign officials in The Hague often landed on their desk.
    However, some officials were shocked when they were confronted with
these intercepts. A Dutch diplomat even informed his Turkish colleague that
the Turkish diplomatic traffic was being intercepted, deciphered and
translated by the TIVC. This stupid move of course infuriated the staff of the
TIVC. Nevertheless, he was not the only one who leaked this information to
the Turkish government. From a Turkish intercept, the TIVC discovered
pretty soon after the incident in The Hague that an Italian source had told the
same story to the Turks. Apparently, the Italian Sigint service was also able
to read this traffic. However, the Turks apparently did not believe these
stories because to the amazement of the Dutch TIVC officials, they did not
change their cipher and code systems, which enabled the TIVC to continue
to read their diplomatic traffic.88
    Finally, a touchy subject: economic intelligence derived from Sigint. In
a briefing on 7 March 2000 before the Washington Foreign Press Center
former CIA director James Woolsey vigorously denied that the United
States was engaged in industrial espionage in the sense of collecting or even
sorting intelligence that it collects overseas for the benefit of or to give to
American corporations. He took this remarkable step in view of the ‘tumult’
in Europe as regards the revelations about Echelon and economic
espionage.89
    However, the Dutch Sigint services certainly have not behaved in the past
like‘ a n g e l s ’and probably will not do so in the future. Via intercepts the
TIVC collected quite a lot of intelligence for Dutch industry. This material
was usually passed on to the Department of Trade and the IDB. In particular
intelligence about foreign tenders and contracts was of importance to
companies and firms in the Netherlands. Also developments in the
international tourist industry were monitored via Sigint. In addition, Sigint
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                        279

on large construction projects like airports, harbours, irrigation, etc. was also
looked for. Also various Dutch multinationals like Philips and Shell received
this kind of economic intelligence. The TIVC also intercepted German
contract information dealing with the construction of frigates for foreign
governments. This enabled Dutch shipyards, for example, to present bids
which were more attractive than the German ones. In the end the Dutch
wharf could sign the contract. On the other hand, the German services like
the BND sometimes also outsmarted the Netherlands by intercepting Dutch
tenders enabling the Germans finally to get the contract.
    There was also a tricky aspect. The IDB exchanged economic
intelligence derived from Sigint. However, this sometimes caused a kind of
incestuous relationship between this service and Dutch economic life. The
something in return mentality within the intelligence world was also applied
to Dutch multinationals and other companies. In exchange for economic
intelligence, industry was often asked to‘ d o something’on behalf of the
Dutch intelligence service. Often there was no need to ask for it because the
companies understood all too well that if they gave nothing in return the
next time they would no longer receive intelligence.90 For example, it is
rumoured that Philips during the construction of enormous telephone
switchboard systems built in a backdoor for the Dutch intelligence
community whereby eavesdropping equipment was installed at the same
time.91 Intelligence was also gathered on behalf of the Ministry of
Agriculture. The TIVC for example forwarded information about the
agricultural output of various European countries.92

THE GULF WAR

Via intercepts the TIVC sometimes also monitored the export or attempts to
export strategic materials, whose export was forbidden. This did not always
mean that the shipment was halted. On the contrary, as in Britain, a modest
Iraqgate took also place in Holland and the services tracked the flow of
deliveries to countries like Iraq in order to establish who was delivering
what to whom. On the basis of these exports and various intercepts, it was
often possible to determine how far science and technology had progressed
in certain nations, like Algeria, Libya, Iran and Iraq.93
    In the 1990s it was again the TIVC which produced excellent results
during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the subsequent war in the Persian
Gulf. Exceptionally valuable Comint and Elint was gathered about the Iraqi
Air Force, Air Defence systems and Navy. This intelligence enabled Dutch
Navy ships taking part in the naval operations in the Gulf to operate in a safe
manner. In particular, intelligence about the location of the Iraqi Air Force
was priceless. Also the interception of diplomatic traffic during the war
280     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

produced valuable information regarding the political and military plans of
Iraq. In addition, I do have to mention that not only the operations by the
TIVC were a great importance. This was also true for the special operations
by the IDB which‘scored’very high ratings from the CIA and MI6. These
secret activities were publicly praised in parliament by the Prime Minister,
Ruud Lubbers.94
    Another target was the former Dutch colony in Latin America, Surinam.
In particular it became a target after the rise to power of Desi Bouterse in
1980. The brutal murder of his opponents in 1982 and the involvement of
Bouterse in cocaine trafficking increased the attention of the Army
Intelligence unit of the Netherlands Military Intelligence Service. This time
the TIVC hardly played any role at all. The main reason was that the
Surinamese diplomats stationed in the Netherlands and Western Europe did
not use ciphers and codes. They communicated with the Surinam capital
Paramaribo in plain language. Accordingly, the diplomatic pouch and
couriers carried many of the confidential and secret messages. It soon turned
out that the diplomatic reports by the Surinam embassy in The Hague
therefore never produced many problems. The messages were very easy to
read because they were not encrypted. The contents of the Surinam
diplomatic traffic was accordingly seldom very valuable from a political or
military viewpoint. Nevertheless, some of the intercepts found there way into
a special Yellow Edition with some Surinam and other Latin American
intercepts, which were of higher value.95

THE F U T U R E

Needless to say that the activities of the TIVC continue until today although
the organisation is hampered by budget cuts and is like many other nations
in search of new targets. It is rumoured in the United States that the TIVC
might be invited to join the Echelon network as run by the UKUSA
countries.96 Perhaps this step is still far away but at the same time it is also
some sort of world-wide recognition of the quality of the Sigint product
which the TIVC produces with a small budget and a modest staff. The Dutch
Sigint service is presently internationally ranked belonging to the best five.
Perhaps the chill in the American-Dutch Sigint relationship caused by the
Petersen spy case was fundamental to this achievement. The Dutch service
had to do it all alone without American financial support and it did so. At the
same time this brought the TIVC in a somewhat unique position compared
to other European Sigint services: the Dutch always remained independent
because the Sigint service was not walking on an American financial leash.
    The year 1999 went down in the MID history as the year of the
reorganisation. This was a final step in a process of integration and
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                    281
centralisation that started in 1987. The Minister of Defence approved the
reorganisation plan by late 1999. The plan improves internal alignment and
transparency in the primary process of the MID. The plan also postulates to
transfer the MID from a primary supply-oriented service into a demand and
service-oriented organisation.97
    In the Netherlands itself the newly fully-integrated Netherlands Military
Intelligence Agency (MID) will cherish its excellent Sigint capability. The
TIVC no longer exists. Also the Sigint units of the Netherlands Air Force
(1st LVG) and Army (898th Vbdbat) have been fully integrated into this new
AVI organisation, a process that took place from 1 January 1996 onwards.
There is presently an Operational Signals Intelligence Division (OVIC) at
Eibergen in the east of Gelderland dealing mainly with intercepting military
communications. OVIC is the outcome of the fusion between the Sigint units
of the Army and Air Force. Apart from OVIC, there is since 1 January 1998
a Strategic Signals Intelligence Division (SVIC) in Amsterdam, which is
dealing primarily with the interception of diplomatic and maritime HF and
satellite traffic and cryptanalytic activities. Both OVIC and SVIC have been
integrated into the Afdeling Verbindingsinlichtingen (AVI) where presently
the analysis of the intercepts is done by a separate unit.98
    SVIC presently mainly reports via AVI to the Intelligence Department of
the Netherlands Military Intelligence Agency, the Cabinet Office and the
Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Trade and the BVD. OVIC is to report primarily
to the intelligence units of the various components of the Netherlands Armed
Forces like the Army, Navy, Air Force and the Military Police.99
    However, there has already been in the past a tendency within the Dutch
Navy to scale down its Sigint activities. Former Navy Admiral Nico Buys
once privately claimed: ‘I can buy a frigate for the money you guys spend on
Sigint.’However, he apparently forgot that Sigint probably saved and will
save in the future the lifespan of the same frigate in future United Nations
peacekeeping and enforcement operations like the war with Iraq.
Nevertheless, the present situation tends to suggest that there will be an
additional merger. SVIC in Amsterdam will be closed in the future and its
staff will be transferred to the MID headquarters in The Hague. The two main
intercept stations, Eibergen and Zoutkamp for satellite communications, will
continue to function for the time being but Eemnes will be abandoned in the
future and its mission moved to Eibergen.
    Nevertheless, overlooking more than 50 years of history it can be safely
stated that during the Cold War the Netherlands Sigint organisations of the
Army, Navy and Air Force played an important role. Their work kept Dutch
policy-makers and military up to date with current diplomatic, political,
military and economic events, trends and developments. However, its
should be said that the main successes of the TIVC were not so much
282      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

achieved against the Soviet bear and its East European allies and China
although small Sigint achievements were made. Important accomplish-
ments in this field were mainly achieved by the Comint activities of the
Army and Air Force, which is another story that one day has to be told. The
accomplishments of TIVC lay mainly in the domain of the national interests
of the Netherlands such as those during the conflict with Indonesia between
1946 and 1962.
    Also in later years valuable intelligence derived from Comint about this
former colony would flow to the Dutch policy-makers and the military.
Needless to say that also in conflicts in Europe and the Middle East the
Dutch service played an important role of keeping the government up to
date regarding the latest developments. This was particularly the case
during the oil crisis of 1973. In this respect it is all the more peculiar that
the consumers of the intelligence product produced by the Netherlands
Sigint organisations never have been willing to pay more for this product.
The Green, Red and Yellow Editions were often highly valued, but when a
higher budget was asked for all ministers involved said most of the time: no
way.

                                          NOTES

 1. See for an analysis of the impact of the oil crisis on the Netherlands: Duco Hellema, Cees
    Wiebes and Toby Witte, Doelwit Rotterdam. Nederland en de oliecrisis 1973–1974 (Den
    Haag: SDU 1998) passim.
 2. Netherlands Military Intelligence Agency, MARID VI/Wiskundig Centrum 1947–1965, Top
    Secret, 31 Oct. 1965, S.Marid 6110/000780/65/zg (hereafter History WKC/TIVC) pp.80–9.
 3. I am also indebted for the comments on an earlier draft made by various former Dutch
    intelligence officials. They prefer to remain anonymous. I also would like to thank Matthew
    Aid for his stimulating comments.
 4. Bob de Graaff,‘From Security Threat to Protection of Vital Interest: Changing Perceptions
    in the Dutch Security Service, 1945–91’, Conflict Quarterly 12/2 (Spring 1992) p.13.
 5. F.A.C. Kluiters, De Nederlandse inlichtingen en veiligheidsdiensten (Den Haag: SDU 1993)
    pp.253–5 and Jaarverslag MID (Den Haag 1998) p.34.
 6. Prior to 1972 it was called Buitenlandse Inlichtingendienst (BID) before it changed its name
    in 1972.
 7. For the history of the IDB: Bob de Graaff and Cees Wiebes, Villa: Maarheeze. De
    geschiedenis van de Inlichtingendienst Buitenland, 1945–1994 (Den Haag: SDU 1998)
    passim.
 8. F.A.C. Kluiters, De Nederlandse inlichtingen- en veiligheidsdiensten (Den Haag 1993)
    pp.153–6 and Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen, Spybook, The Encyclopedia of
    Espionage (NY: Random House 1998) pp.141–5.
 9. Confidential interview.
10. James Bamford, The Puzzle Palace. Inside the National Security Agency, America’s Most
    Secret Intelligence Organization (NY: Houghton Mifflin 1985) pp.173–7.
11. D. Lawrence,‘Today in Washington’, New York Herald Tribune, 16 Nov. 1954.
12. Archives of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Code 921.0 B.K., Van Tuyl to Van
    Roijen, No. 7173, 12 Oct. 1954.
13. National Archives, Washington DC, RG 59, box 3745, 756.5211/10-2954, Marcy to State
    Department, 29 Oct. 1954.
DUTCH SIGINT 1945–94                                                                     283
 14. Public Record Office, London, FO 371/109482, Chancery The Hague to Foreign Office, CN
      10345/3, 3 Nov. 1954.
 15. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.1–4.
 16. A confidential interview. Also‘PTT werkte jarenlang als spion’, Utrechts Nieusblad, 13 Nov.
      1995.
 17. F.A.C. Kluiters, De Nederlandse inlichtingen- en veiligheidsdiensten. Supplement (Den
      Haag: SDU 1995) p.82.
 18. Archives of the BVD, File BID/IDB (Part 2), No. 2.279.266-a0, Memo DOB/EH to PHD, 19
      Oct. 1962.
 19. Private information.
20. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) p.93.
21. Dick Engelen, Inlichtingendienst Buitenland. Een institutioneel onderzoek naar de
     Buitenlandse Inlichtingendienst/Inlichtingendienst Buitenland 1946–1996 (Den Haag: SDU
      1996) p.78.
22. Confidential interview.
23. Archives of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs (hereafter NMFA), Code 921.0 B.K.,
     Memo by Van Tuyll to Einthoven, Nov. 1954.
24. Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.81. Also Willem Heyboon,‘PTT-dienst onderschepte
     jarenlang telegrammen, Het Parool, 13 Nov. 1995.
25. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.5–18.
26. Ibid. pp.19–20.
27. Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.84.
28. A confidential interview.
29. Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.84.
30. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) Appendix 16.
31. Archives of the Netherlands Cabinet Office (hereafter CAB), Folder No. 3, FOIA No.
     99M008634, Memo to Director IDB, Secret, 16 June 1988.
32. History WKC/TIVC (note 2), Appendix 37, Memo Spanjaard to Director Marid, 19 Nov. 1956.
33. History WKC/TIVC (note 2), Appendix 24, Memo, Top Secret, 1 Feb. 1957.
34. A confidential interview.
35. Private information.
36. A confidential interview.
37. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) p.30.
38. A confidential interview.
39. National Archives, Washington DC, Record Group RG 457, NSA Records, Box 171,
     Indonesia General, GCHQ Intercepts, various dates.
40. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.43–4.
41. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) pp.121–243.
42. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.31–2.
43. Ibid.p.92.
44. Private information.
45. A confidential interview and History WKC/TIVC (note 2) p.44.
46. Various confidential interviews. See also: Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.122.
47. Peter Wright with Paul Greengrass, Spycatcher. The Candid Autobiography of a Senior
     Intelligence Officer (NY: Viking Press 1987) pp.138–41.
48. Duco Hellema, Buitenlandse politiek van Nederland (Utrecht: SDU 1995) pp.211–12.
49. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) p.34.
50. A confidential interview. See also: Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) pp.108–9.
51. Public Record Office (PRO), London, FO 371/162405, Minute by A.D. Parsons on Cuba,
     Secret, 9 Nov. 1962. Thanks to Jim Hershberg for pointing to this document. See also
     Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.121.
52. A confidential interview.
53. Jeffrey T. Richelson and Desmond Ball, The Ties that Bind (Boston: Unwin Hyman 1990)
    passim.
54. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) p.73.
55. Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.120.
284      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

56. M.W. Jensen and G. Platje, De MARID. De Marine Inlichtingendienst van binnenuit belicht
    (Den Haag: SDU 1997) p.298 e.v.
57. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.73–4.
58. P. Yska,‘Radio-Interceptie bij de Troepenmacht in Suriname’, Intercom 28/4 (Dec. 1999)
    pp.19–27.
59. Confidential interview.
60. History WKC/TIVC (note 2) pp.75–9.
61. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) pp.232–42.
62. Various confidential interviews. Also Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.121.
63. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) pp.280–1.
64. CAB, Inv. File No. 2, FOIA No. 98M008634, Director IDB to Director WKC, No. 29/HR/81,
    19 Jan. 1981.
65. CAB, Inv. No. 116, FOIA No. 98M008820, Memo Interception, Top Secret, 1 May 1985.
66. Kluiters, Supplement (note 17) p.112.
67. CAB, File 1, FOIA No. 99M008634, Director IDB to Director TIVC, No. 453/CF/88, 8 Nov.
    1988.
68. Hellema, Wiebes and Witte, Doelwit Rotterdam (note 1) pp.24–32.
69. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) pp.280–1.
70. Hellema, Wiebes and Witte, Doelwit Rotterdam (note 1) pp.161–96.
71. NMFA, Code 6, File III, 613.211.45, Box 38, Folder 440, Kruimink to Van der Stoel, No. 20,
    Top Secret, 22 Nov. 1973.
72. Various confidential interviews.
73. A confidential interview.
74. A confidential interview.
75. Robert Schouten,‘Koude Oorlog is ook oorlog’, Haagsche Courant, 30 March 1985.
76. J. de Haas and Ch. Sanders,‘Zien onze spionnen spoken?’, De Telegraaf, 1 Feb. 1992.
77. Dick Engelen, De Militaire Inlichtingendienst 1914–2000 (Den Haag: SDU 2000)
    pp.112–14.
78. CAB, Inv. No. 116, FOIA No. 98M008820, Memo Interception, Top Secret, 1 May 1985.
79. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) p.273.
80. CAB, Folder No. 3, FOIA No. 99M008634, Memo Interception, Top Secret, 26 Jan. 1987.
81. A confidential interview.
82. A confidential interview.
83. Various confidential interviews.
84. Aukje Holtrop en Rudie van Meurs,‘ D e geheime Wassenaarse dossiers van de Sjah’, Vrij
    Nederland 39, 9 Sept. 1978.
85. Mike Frost and Michael Gratton, Spyworld. Inside the Canadian and American Intelligence
    Establishments (Toronto: Doubleday 1994) p.23.
86. A confidential interview.
87. Zie ook R. Schouten,‘Afluisteren op grote schaal’, Haagsche Courant, 30 March 1985,
    idem,‘De ondergang van de IDB’, HP/De Tijd, 6 May 1992.
88. A confidential interview.
89. Transcript of briefing by former CIA Director James Woolsey at the Foreign Press Center in
    Washington DC, 7 March 2000. See: http://cryptome.org/echelon-cia.htm
90. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) pp.295–6.
91. M. Thomassen,‘Philips in diskrediet’, Algemeen Dagblad, 24 April 1982.
92. A confidential interview.
93. Vgl. ook M. Koolhoven,‘Geheime agenten’, De Telegraaf, 19 April 1997.
94. De Graaff and Wiebes, Villa Maarheeze (note 7) p.402.
95. Ibid. pp.363–4. Also a confidential interview.
96. A confidential interview.
97. Annual Report Nederlandse Military Intelligence Service 1999 (The Hague: MID 2000)
    p.24.
98. See also Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal, Vergaderjaar 1995–1996,Vragen gesteld door
    kamerlid Hoekema, No. 1240, p.2521, 2 May 1996.
99. Engelen, De Militaire Inlichtingendienst (note 77) p.147.
                                      9
             Dutch Sigint and the Conflict
                   with Indonesia

                            WIES PLATJE




When I left the former Netherlands New Guinea in October 1962, it was
impossible to foresee that 38 years later an invitation would arrive to
contribute to a book about Sigint in Western Europe during the Cold War. I
was a junior analyst in the intelligence section of the Commanding officer of
the Netherlands Forces in Hollandia. My long flight home marked the end of
a period of hard work, tropical heat, round the clock intelligence shifts and an
endless stream of intercepted Indonesian messages that had to be processed.
    For the time being no more Sigint for me. Although, I realised that the
effort of the Netherlands Navy Intelligence Service and especially the
product of the radio interception section on the island of Biak, played a
crucial role in successful Dutch military operations in, around and in the
skies above the Netherlands’last foothold in the Far East. Before coming to
the core of this contribution:‘Dutch Sigint and the Conflict with Indonesia’,
I would like to give a brief historical résumé of Dutch communication
intelligence activities and the development of cryptology and cryptanalysis
in the Netherlands. In this review, emphasis will be put on Sigint operations
in South East Asia.

REVIEW

In the early history of Europe, characterised by frequent and long lasting
wars, efforts have been made to decipher secret messages of the enemy. The
nineteenth century introduction of the telegraph, and later, the twentieth
century use of wireless radio systems for military and diplomatic
communications, presented new possibilities to fulfil this requirement. The
new techniques provided a unique fast way to communicate, but rendered the
enemy the possibility to intercept the message. The use of codes to encipher
the message was the answer.
286     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

   Enciphering of sensitive information became common practice, while
the same time much effort was put in the development of knowledge
necessary to decipher foreign code systems. It is obvious that also in the
Netherlands, with its world-wide international commercial interests, a
neutral position between powerful and aggressive neighbours and overseas
colonies, efforts were made to intercept foreign communication lines and to
develop cryptological expertise.

W O R L D WAR I

The outbreak of World War I forced the Netherlands government to
restructure and to enlarge the intelligence organisation. In order to maintain
its safe and neutral position amid the powers at war, a military intelligence
service with the capability to monitor foreign communication lines and to
decipher secret messages became urgently needed. So, when in 1914 the
Dutch armed forces were brought to a state of‘war readiness’the Army
increased the organisation of the military intelligence service (GS 3) with a
new section: GS 4. The task of this new section included censorship,
counter-espionage, counter smuggling and cryptology. Herewith, Dutch
‘Black Room’ operations in modern history became a fact.
    In this period the‘Godfather’of Dutch cryptology, Henri Koot, plays a
very important role. He was born in the Netherlands-Indies in 1883 as son
of a European father and a Chinese mother he went to the Royal Military
Academy in the town of Breda in 1901 and returned to the Dutch colony in
1904 as lieutenant in the Royal Netherlands-Indies Army. Until 1911 he was
involved in military actions against rebels on the islands of Ceram and
Ambon. In 1911 he started a study at the Higher Military Staff College in
The Hague. He would never return to his native soil. Europe faced the
outbreak of World War I and Koot, a man with a mystical mind and a non-
Western world of thought and gifted with an amazing talent for
mathematical and rhythmical analysis, was assigned to the new Army
section GS 4.
    At the outbreak of war there was hardly any cryptological expertise, a
great challenge for Koot who started to study intercepted radio messages
looking for mistakes and repetitions. With his natural feeling for solving
puzzles and his statistical insight he laid the foundation of the revival of an
almost forgotten science in the Netherlands. His work was aimed at
improvement of national code systems and to create more possibilities to
explore foreign communications by deciphering encrypted messages.
    The importance of the Army sections GS 3 and GS 4 was clearly
recognised by the government. The number of intelligence personnel
increased significantly. At the end of the war 12 officers and a proportional
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                             287

number of enlisted personnel were involved in‘Black Room’operations
and another important decision was made: the sections were not
demobilised after the war. In 1919 Captain Henri Koot became head of the
enciphering service of the General Staff, subsection GS 3c. One year later
he became head of the Cryptological Bureau, an inter-governmental service
of the Department of Foreign Affairs, manned with army and navy
personnel. In this function he put much effort in the training of new
communication and intelligence personnel of both the Army and the Navy.
Lessons given by Koot were hard to keep up with for his students because
of the complex and abstract character of cryptology and the high pace he
displayed. Koot knew this but he never changed his methods, because he
was convinced that by doing so he would lose a selection criterion for
natural talents.
    For budgetary reasons Major Koot was discharged from his function as
head of the Cryptological Bureau in 1933. This measure caused a deep
personal crisis. He remained head of subsection GS 3c. In 1939 Koot was
convinced that the Netherlands military communication and security
organisation was insufficiently prepared for war and much was done by him
to improve this situation. During the war he became a key figure in the
Resistance, among others using the cover of the International Red Cross. In
1944 he became commanding officer of the Internal Armed Forces, a
function in which he became involved with ceasefire and surrender
negotiations with the defeated German Army. Because of the fact that in
1945 his counterpart, a German general refused to negotiate with a lower
ranked officer, Koot was promoted to Major General. In 1947 he retired
from the service and died in 1958. Nationally Koot is well known for his
outstanding activities during World War II, but it is also fairly well known
that he was one of the world’s most brilliant cryptologists.1

JAPAN

In the Netherlands, the need for communication interception capabilities
and cryptological expertise intensified when in the early 1930s a growing
number of prominent Japanese politicians and both military and civilian
authorities began to speak openly of territorial expansion as a plausible
solution for the economical problems Japan was faced with. The Dutch
authorities became more and more concerned about a possible Japanese
attempt to seize oilfields in the Netherlands-Indies or other targets of
interest for the Japanese economy. In that time it was assessed by the central
intelligence service in the Netherlands-Indies, the‘Service of East-Asian
Affairs’(Doaz) that, if such an action should be carried out, the limited
Dutch military forces, facing the geographical extensiveness of the
288     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Netherlands-Indies, would probably fail in a successful response. Also, the
Dutch military commanders realised that in fact little was known about
Japanese military developments and capabilities, in particular intelligence
on shipbuilding programmes, tactical doctrines and military training
standards in the Japanese Imperial Navy was urgently required.
    The structural military weakness and the initial Dutch policy of strict
neutrality in the Pacific region consequently resulted in the development of
a national expertise in the field of cryptology and codebreaking. One of the
first and important steps was the installation of a navy radio monitor station
in 1933. This station was situated in a building of the Staff of the Royal
Netherlands Navy in Batavia.2 The purpose of the unit was to monitor the
naval communications of France, the United Kingdom, the United States
and Japan. It is evident that Japan soon became target number one. In the
mean time some Netherlands Navy officers started a study in the Japanese
language both in Holland and in Japan, while others attended cryptology
courses given by the already mentioned Koot.

THE FIRST SUCCESS

In 1934 the Netherlands Navy restructured its organisation in the
Netherlands and in the Netherlands-Indies. As a result of this an intelligence
section was established on the staff of the Commander of the Royal
Netherlands Navy in Batavia. Lieutenant-Commander J. F. W. Nuboer
became the first head of the section. He had a background as radio officer
and was trained in the use of code systems and in cryptanalysis.3 Appointing
Nuboer to this job proved to be very successful.
    From 1935 onwards, Nuboer managed to provide a very reliable and
current order of battle of the Japanese Navy. Step by step, he and his
assistants managed to break Japanese navy codes, a very remarkable result
in a time when one had to rely on‘one-human-brain-processors’only. Not
only an accurate naval order of battle was produced, but also a good insight
into naval ship movements by intercepting daily weather reports containing
the name of the ship and its position.4

ROOM 14

The cryptological bureau of the Netherlands-Indies government was
established in Bandoeng together with Section 7 of the General Staff of the
Royal Netherlands-Indies Army, responsible for deciphering intercepted
diplomatic messages. This section was located in‘Room 14’, a very well
protected and secret part of the General Staff building in Bandoeng. In the
history of‘Room 1 4 ’in particular the year 1932 stands out, when the
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                           289
                                    FIGURE 9.1




           Captain Henri Koot, Royal Netherlands-Indies Army.


Japanese diplomatic codes were broken as a result of a systematic approach
and stiff perseverance.5
    In July 1937, when Japan de facto declared war against China, the
Japanese Navy communication security intensified and wartime codes were
applied. From that time it became almost impossible to decipher the
intercepted messages. In the fall of 1938 a new Japanese code system was
introduced. It consisted of five numbers coded by a table of 10,000
numbers. This was too much for Dutch naval intelligence.
    In the meantime an officer without any feeling for or experience in
cryptology and codebreaking relieved Commander Nuboer. Consequently
Japanese naval traffic was no longer intercepted. Until the attack on Pearl
Harbor, intelligence on Japanese naval movements was mainly based on
surveillance by submarines and aircraft reconnaissance. Navy analysts now
joined their army colleagues in‘Room 1 4 ’in Bandoeng. The joint efforts
became successful.
    The professional standard and dedication of personnel enabled the
Dutch authorities on almost every occasion to anticipate promptly and
adequately Japanese diplomatic and subversive actions.6 When in 1939,
Europe faced the outbreak of World War II,‘Room 1 4 ’had to deal with
290     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

another problem. Many German messages were intercepted and from these
messages the Netherlands authorities learned that German diplomats in
Batavia had frequent contacts with Japanese secret agents and with
Indonesian nationalists.

P E A R L HARBOR

From the early 1930s onwards Dutch codebreakers were able to decipher
Japanese code systems without support from the United States and the
United Kingdom. Long before 1941, when the United States provided
London with knowledge about the Purple, Red and other Japanese systems,
Dutch analysts had already deciphered these systems independently. In that
time both the United States and the Netherlands maintained a neutral policy
against Japan and a structural exploitation of intelligence did not take place.
    When in January 1941 Captain William R. Purnell, Chief of Staff of the
US Pacific Fleet, had a secret meeting in Batavia with the Dutch
Commander-in-Chief Vice-Admiral C. E. L. Helfrich, both parties
maintained silence about the progress of breaking Japanese codes. In 1941,
the Dutch authorities assessed that a Japanese attack on the Netherlands-
Indies would not take place as long as the US Pacific Fleet in Pearl Harbor
posed a threat to the Imperial Navy. The American author Robert D.
Haslach, writes in his book Nishi No Kaze Hare interesting details about the
development of Dutch-US intelligence exchange and the fact that this
intelligence assessment, although released to the US, until now not has been
found in the US National Archive. Nishi No Kaze Hare means‘Westerly
winds, clear sight’and this phrase was used in a Top Secret Message from
Tokyo to the Japanese diplomatic station in Batavia. It indicated that an
attack on the Netherlands-Indies was imminent and that Japanese
international diplomacy was about to collapse. The same message indicated
the probability of military actions against the United States.
    Currently there is a very interesting international exchange of views,
facts and opinions between historians about the question: was President
Roosevelt informed about the Japanese plans to attack Pearl Harbor? On 1
December, seven days before the attack, the Japanese navy codes were
changed, not only the highest code‘ J N - 2 5 ’but also the list of call signs.
This was a serious problem for traffic analysis, but within two days, 200 of
the most important callsigns could be re-identified by FRUPAC, the US
Fleet Radio Unit Pacific.7
    Until the occupation of the Netherlands Indies and the inevitable
surrender,‘Room 14’remained successful in providing tactical intelligence
on Japanese operations. The benefit of this was decreased gradually by a
fast growing and bitter shortage of war material and equipment. Especially
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                            291

the lack of sufficient air power increased the speed of the military defeat
significantly. The Japanese forces occupied Java on 8 March 1942, almost
100 days after Pearl Harbor. The Royal Netherlands Navy had lost 2
cruisers, 7 destroyers, 8 submarines, 2 gunboats, 7 minelayers, 20
minesweepers and several auxiliary vessels. The remains of the fleet,
including 1 cruiser, 3 destroyers, 4 gunboats and 14 submarines, escaped
and joined the Allied naval forces in the ongoing war against Japan.8

THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION

Only a few members of Dutch intelligence personnel were evacuated. Two
men were detached to the British communication intelligence service in
Ceylon. One of them was the navy officer L. Brouwer, who studied the
Japanese language and cryptology before the war. Early in 1942 Lieutenant-
Commander Brouwer joined the new Netherlands Forces Intelligence
Service (Nefis) in Australia and became head of Section III, responsible for
special intelligence and special operations.
    At the end of the war Brouwer was tasked to design a plan for an inter-
governmental communication intelligence organisation. Herewith the
foundation was laid for the WKC in Amsterdam. Brouwer resumed his
career as a navy officer outside the intelligence community and became
Commander-in-Chief of the Royal Netherlands Navy in 1959 as a vice-
admiral. A third cryptologist, Verkuyl, an officer in the Royal Netherlands-
Indies Army, went to the United States where he was attached to the US
Sigint organisation SIS. In 1947 Colonel J. A. Verkuyl became the first head
of Marid 6, the new communication intelligence centre in Amsterdam, later
called the WKC.

THE N E T H E R L A N D S FORCES I N T E L L I G E N C E SERVICE

Early in 1943, General Douglas MacArthur complained about the lack of
sufficient intelligence on the Netherlands-Indies. He wanted the
Netherlands military command to set up its own intelligence service to fill
this gap. The Netherlands Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Helfrich acted
quickly and in May 1943, a joint Dutch intelligence organisation was
formed in Australia, called the Netherlands Forces Intelligence Service
(Nefis).
    First head of this service was Commander G. B. Salm. After the war
Rear-Admiral Salm became the first head of the newly formed Netherlands
Navy Intelligence Service (Marid). The Allied command in the Pacific
tasked Nefis to operate in the occupied Netherlands-Indies (not including
the island of Sumatra). In 1943 Nefis consisted of three sections: Section 1
292      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

‘general intelligence’, Section 2 ‘internal safety and security’ and Section 3
‘special intelligence’ and ‘special operations’. Nefis Section 3 executed ‘hit
and run’operations and‘intelligence parties’deep inside occupied territory.
Nefis 3 was part of the Allied Intelligence Bureau (AIB), formed in July
1942 to coordinate various national intelligence operations. The AIB was
organised in 4 sections: Section A‘British Secret Service (SOE and SOA)’,
Section B‘Australian section of the British Special Operations Unit’,
Section C‘Field intelligence’and Section D‘Propaganda’.9 Until the end of
the war Nefis did not carry out Sigint operations, but there are interesting
examples of Japanese Sigint activities against Dutch intelligence
commandos operating in New Guinea.
   One of the most successful intelligence parties was Operation‘Prawn’.
A Dutch submarine, ten miles east of the Japanese army headquarters near
Sorong, dropped the Nefis party consisting of seven secret agents. The
objective was to report daily by short-wave radio communication:
•   patrol flights of Japanese aircraft along the north coast
•   Movements of Japanese naval vessels along the coast
•   Dislocation of Japanese forces in the area
•   Suitable-landing areas for imminent landing operations of Allied forces
    and weather reports in support of Allied air attacks.
The intelligence reports were very successful. Allied Liberator bombers
often attacked reported Japanese naval reinforcement and supply vessels in
the area.
    Of course this did not remain unnoticed by Japanese intelligence. They
activated Elint operations resulting in locating the general dropping area
by means of direction finding of intercepted radio communications.
Japanese patrols were deployed to eliminate the Dutch agents. A warning by
local people enabled the party to escape by submarine safely after three
months of fruitful intelligence collection.10 One of the Nefis agents who
took part in Operation‘ P r a w n ’was J. F. (Fred) Bastiaans, a former officer
in the Royal Netherlands-Indies Army. After the war he left the military
service and became head of the traffic analysis section of the WKC in
Amsterdam.

A NEW I N T E L L I G E N C E C H A L L E N G E

When Japan capitulated in August 1945, 54 Nefis employees were
transferred to Batavia. There they faced a new intelligence challenge: a
confrontation with a very determined and dedicated adversary, the new
Republic of Indonesia proclaimed by Achmed Sukarno. The nationalists
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                                293

rapidly formed military units. They managed to build, almost from scratch,
a well-organised high-frequency radio communication network.
    In order to re-establish Dutch authority, intelligence on enemy plans,
strength and dislocation was urgently required. To enable Nefis to carry out
this requirement a new‘Section 8 ’was formed. The task of the new section
was radio-interception, radio traffic analysis and cryptanalysis. Nefis 8,
with its wartime-trained arsenal of Sigint experts, realised the good
possibilities for Sigint operations but at the start the new section faced many
problems. First it had to carry out a broad survey in the entire short-wave
frequency spectrum, looking for manually-operated Indonesian Morse code
transmitters. Information on working frequencies, callsigns, used codes and
transmitting schedules was not available.
    The high-frequency spectrum had to be searched patiently, but success
came soon: one by one Indonesian military radio stations were found and
localised and messages were intercepted. It did not take long before a
communication intelligence section, manned with navy, army and air force
personnel, became fully operational. Comint groups were sent to various
locations on the most important islands, Java and Sumatra. Soon it was
possible to intercept the entire communication network of the Indonesian
sea-, air- and land forces and used codes were successfully broken.
    Started in 1945, Nefis 8 became a large, efficient Comint section by mid-
1947. In the military field, Nefis 8 was very successful in producing
intelligence on working frequencies and transmission schedules, including
names of Indonesian radio operators. Nefis also managed to produce a
reliable picture of the military organisation, the order of battle of the
military units and the state of military readiness. On the diplomatic and
economic front Nefis was successful in gathering intelligence on intended
Indonesian diplomatic movements and the purchase of weapons abroad.
Due to Nefis 8 the Dutch military commanders received unique
intelligence.11

P E N E T R A T I O N OF THE I N D O N E S I A N HIGH C O M M A N D RADIO
NETWORK

In June 1947 the Netherlands planned the first major military operation to
overthrow the Sukarno government. In support of this an electronic
intelligence operation was set up to penetrate the Indonesian
communication network. Thorough electronic intelligence analysis of the
keying-characteristics of radio transmitters used in the Indonesian armed
forces and the analysis of manual keying characteristics of Indonesian radio
operators, rendered the possibility of a successful infiltration into the radio
communication net of the Indonesian Army General Staff.
294     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

    Nefis 8 managed to set up a short-wave transmitter with modulated
continuous wave characteristics, identical to the short-wave transmitter used
by the Indonesian army headquarters in Yogja. A Nefis radio operator,
trained to imitate manual Morse-keying characteristics of Indonesian
operators, was tasked to operate the fake transmitter.12
    A continous wave transmitter has its own unique‘fingerprint’. This is
also the case with each individual manual Morse-code operator. Personal
deviations from the ideal time-unit proportions will identify the particular
operator.13
    On the day the Dutch troops launched the attack, the fake Nefis
transmitter called all radio stations with the message to listen in to a flash
signal from the Indonesian supreme army commander to be sent
immediately after the call. This was done 10 minutes before the Indonesian
HQ transmitter in Yogja was due to become active. After acknowledgement
of the call, the Nefis operator sent a fake message, enciphered in the
Indonesian army high command code, to all Indonesian regional radio
stations. In the message all regional commanders of the Indonesian army
were ordered to abstain from‘scorched earth’tactics when attacked by
Dutch troops. After receiving acknowledgement of receipt, the Nefis
operator warned the Indonesian operators on duty to be aware of fake
transmitters to be expected to come on the air after this contact. When the
real Yogja transmitter came on air at 0800, all his calls to the regional radio
stations remained unanswered. An important beneficial circumstance of this
deception operation was the total disruption of the Indonesian Army Staff
communications for days.14
    After the second major military operation in 1948, Nefis was renamed:
Central Military Intelligence Service (CMI). The interception section was
now called the CMI Comint section. Not only the Indonesian military
communications were intercepted by this section but also the Indonesian
national and international public radio communication network.
Exploitation of this source provided important information on political,
economic and military subjects such as the purchase of foreign military
hardware by Indonesia.

NEW G U I N E A

When in December 1949 the transfer of sovereignty to the Republic of
Indonesia, with the exception of the western part of New Guinea, was a fact,
a part of the CMI Comint section was transferred to the Intelligence Section
of the Territorial Command New Guinea in the capital Hollandia. Some
time before this, a small radio interception detachment of Nefis 8 was
already operating in this area. It was arranged that Marid 6 in Amsterdam
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                               295

and section G2 of the General Staff of the Royal Netherlands Army in the
Hague should support the detachment in case intercepted codes could not be
broken locally. Due to a persistent lack of support from G2 this arrangement
never worked satisfactory.15 The CMI Comint section became Office 5 of
the MID, the Army Intelligence service.
    The remaining part of the CMI personnel was sent to Holland. There,
some of these experts were employed in the new communication-
intelligence section in Amsterdam, Marid 6, later called the WKC
(Wiskundig Centrum). Marid is the Dutch abbreviation of Navy Intelligence
Service. Shortly before the transfer of sovereignty archives and equipment
of Nefis 8 were shipped to the Netherlands. Useful material, such as 22
‘Boehme’ receivers, was disposed to Marid 6. The Nefis archives were
shipped to the Ministry of Overseas Territories.16
    By the end of 1949 the Netherlands faced a completely changed
situation in the Far East. An‘empire’was lost and Indonesia was very clear
about its intentions towards Netherlands New Guinea. The need for Sigint
remained. In a time when the Indonesian armed forces improved the
communication security by introducing new code systems, Office 5 in
Hollandia lacked experienced cryptanalysts. The Indonesian Air Force
codes were especially difficult to decipher.17 The Army Sigint section was
equipped with 15 CR88B receivers, 3 Marconi diversities and 3 Hell
recorders. In those days the Royal Netherlands Navy in New Guinea had
only one small intelligence unit: the Staff Officer Intelligence with a limited
number of personnel. The Army provided the Navy with Sigint information
of Indonesian maritime movements when available.

THE ROYAL N E T H E R L A N D S NAVY

By a decision of the Netherlands Government taken on 15 April 1954 the
territorial defence of Netherlands New Guinea, including intelligence,
became a responsibility of the Royal Netherlands Navy.18 Experts from the
WKC in Amsterdam were deployed to Hollandia and a new Sigint section
called Marid 6 Netherlands New Guinea (NNG) became operational in
April 1955.
    A total of 15 military (3 officers, 6 non-commissioned officers, 6 clerks)
and 21 civilians (18 radio operators, 1 assistant cryptologist and 2
translators) took over from their army colleagues and a‘hot line’for crypto-
and analysis support between Amsterdam and Hollandia was set up. The
first head of the navy Sigint section was Lieutenant-Commander Ruud
Gout, a former secret agent who had participated in Nefis operations inside
Jappanese occupied New Guinea. Soon the difference in culture and
mentality between the military and civilian employees of Marid 6 NNG
296      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                      FIGURE 9.2




Madrid 6 at Hollandia, New Guinea, 1955.
                                                                 Van Heutzkump



caused a conflict about the quality of lodging and food. Better financial
conditions solved the problems. In the first year Marid 6 NNG intercepted
an average of 185 plaintext and 21 ciphered messages daily. While the
workload increased gradually, problems were caused by the lack of
sufficient manpower.19
    From 1955 onwards until the end in 1962, it was always very difficult to
man the necessary functions. The solution was found in augmentation by
civilians, as well as with army and air force personnel. In 1958 radio
operators of the former Nefis Section 8 and four additional operators of the
Royal Netherlands Air Force were sent to New Guinea.
    In September 1957 the radio interception unit was moved to Biak. For
the territorial defence of New Guinea, this island, with its international
airport, naval airbase, logistic support and repair facilities was of great
strategic importance. As a result of the far better facilities at Biak the
production of Marid 6 NNG soon increased significantly. The Sigint section
was organised in five departments: Traffic analysis (tasking), Crypto-
analysis (codebreaking), Deciphering (technical processing), Translation
and a support department for administrative processing and distribution.
    The section performed very well. The commander of the Netherlands
Forces in New Guinea received four editions with intercepts weekly.
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                               297

                                      FIGURE 9.3




Madrid 6 at Biak, New Guinea, 1957.


Intercepts with an urgent character were sent as an immediate Top Secret
message to Hollandia. The intelligence section was now capable of locating
the positions of the most important elements in the Indonesian armed forces,
the transfer of key personnel, the construction of facilities such as airbases,
fuel depots and naval support facilities.20

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

One year after the establishment of the independence in Indonesia in 1949,
the status of the western part of New Guinea began to influence the
diplomatic relationship between the Netherlands and the former Dutch
colony in a negative way. Both the Netherlands government and a
significant majority in the parliament agreed on the fact that New Guinea
should remain part of the Kingdom until the time the Papuan people would
be capable of deciding their own fate. Indonesia disagreed with this policy.
Their point of departure was: ‘Irian Barat belonged to the Indonesian
territory and was illegally possessed by the Netherlands.’
    When in the 1950s Indonesian attempts to force the Netherlands via the
United Nations to participate in negotiations about the transfer of authority
failed, it became clear that President Sukarno would use military force to
reach his goal. Dutch policy was then aimed at reducing this threat by
international diplomacy. At the same time much effort was put in trying to
298     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

get promises from the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia for
military support in case of a large-scale armed conflict. Some vague
statements of possible support were given but President Eisenhower stated
very clearly that the United States would firmly support the principle of
non-violent territorial changes. American Secretary of State, John Foster
Dulles, warned his Indonesian colleague Subandrio that the United States
would not tolerate the use of military means to solve this political conflict.
    The government of the United Kingdom declared that an official
statement about military support in case of a military conflict was out of the
question now the United States refused to make such a statement. London
warned Jakarta that, in case of aggression, it would help the Netherlands in
an appropriate way. This statement did not contain a promise for military
support. In the New Guinea conflict Australia had always stated that
Indonesian authority over the western part of the island was unacceptable.
Australia changed this policy when it became clear that a military
confrontation between the Netherlands and Indonesia had become a serious
possibility.
    In the late 1950s it became clear that, despite the fact that the United
States, the United Kingdom and Australia principally recognised the
Netherlands sovereignty over Western New Guinea and strongly opposed
Indonesian military actions, military support was practically out of the
question. If the Netherlands wanted to stick to its policy of maintaining
sovereignty until the self-determination of the Papuans, it had to take its
own military responsibilities and measures. From 1959 onwards the
emancipation of the Papuan people was speeded up in order to bring it to
self-determination as soon as possible. A well-equipped hospital in
Hollandia, a shipyard in Manokwari, agricultural research sites and
plantations as well as a military unit, the Papua Volunteer Corps, were set
up to provide the necessary facilities.
    In 1960 the New Guinea Council was established and the next year
members of this council were voted in during general elections. An
invitation for the official installation of the council was first accepted by the
United States but a few days later was countermanded. Jakarta realised that
the Netherlands was determined to continue the emancipation policy which
would lead to a national consciousness of the Papuan people and a drive
towards an independent status. Time was no longer in favour of Jakarta and
President Sukarno came to the conclusion that he could not wait until the
 completion of the democratic process in western New Guinea. Action
 should be taken soon to incorporate Irian Barat, including the military
 option. On the diplomatic front Australia was still a Dutch ally but Australia
 was willing to accept any compromise, except military support, to solve
 the problem.
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                              299

    In March 1961, the young and dynamic John F. Kennedy became the
new president of the United States. The Dutch assessment was that the
policy of the new administration would be influenced by the following
factors: an ambition for a new and fast approach to solve old problems, the
traditional anti-colonial attitude in the United States, the fear of an
Indonesian drift towards Communism and the Dutch efforts to create the
right of self-determination for the Papuans. History learned that in The
Hague this last factor was overestimated. The Kennedy administration was
expected to take steps to eliminate the possibility of a potential conflict
quickly. Such a solution would most probably not be in favour of
maintaining the status quo, which The Hague was aiming at.
    Diplomacy failed. The Netherlands government was not able to find
international support for its policy and President Sukarno manoeuvred
himself smartly into a favourable position. With the political and material
support of not only the Soviet Union and its allies but also of some
prominent Western countries, Sukarno could constantly increase the
military pressure knowing that nobody in the world would like to burn its
fingers in supporting the Netherlands. The Netherlands forces in New
Guinea had to face military action in a political conflict that was impossible
to win.

I N T E R N A T I O N A L ISOLATION

The fact that the Netherlands policy of bringing New Guinea to an
independent status under Dutch guidance was not generally supported,
caused a certain international isolation of the Netherlands. In that time the
United States for instance tried to appease President Sukarno in an effort to
block Soviet influence in the Asian theatre. This isolation had its effects on
the routine intelligence exchange between the Netherlands and its NATO
allies.‘ W e have to do this on our o w n ’was the general thought and‘our
national intelligence assets and capabilities should be protected at any
price’. When a message was intercepted from an Indonesian warship, on its
way to visit the US naval base at Guam, in which the commanding officer
informed the Indonesian Naval Command about a cholera outbreak
onboard, this intercept was not copied to the US. Instead a message was sent
to the US Naval Attaché in The Hague containing the report from a‘so-
called’human source in Indonesia about health problems on board that
particular ship.21
    In 1962 the Royal Netherlands Navy deployed a task group, consisting
of the aircraft carrier Hr.Ms. Karel Doorman escorted by two anti-
submarine destroyers, to the Caribbean. The secret part of this operation
was the plan to send the two destroyers to the waters around New Guinea
300     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

when deemed necessary. After passing the Panama Canal the task group
visited the US naval base at San Diego. The received order to sail to the
conflict area was classified Top Secret and caused the Netherlands
commander some painful moments when the hosting US Navy admiral
insisted on finding out the real destination of the ships. What the Dutch
commanding officer did not know was that The Hague already had notified
the US Navy about the real destination. He had hardly enough time to
apologise when he received a copy of this message shortly before
departure.22

N E T H E R L A N D S I N T E L L I G E N C E LIAISON IN SINGAPORE

The intensifying conflict between Indonesia and the Netherlands over the
western part of New Guinea required additional reliable intelligence sources
in the area. In 1957 the Royal Netherlands Navy posted an intelligence
officer in Singapore. Singapore was important because of the presence of
the headquarters of the British Far Eastern Forces and the intelligence
service MI6. In these years British intelligence had to cover the entire Far
East including Indonesia. As a result of this huge area of interest, the British
services were initially not very well informed. Fortunately this changed
rapidly as a result a significant increase in technical intelligence support
facilities.
    The Netherlands saw the United Kingdom, as a NATO member and
colonial power, as a natural ally in a future military conflict with Indonesia.
Besides this it was known that the interest of the British intelligence
services in Indonesia was growing due to the increasing political influence
of the Indonesian Communist Party. After all, British forces had just
finished a ten year campaign to overcome the Chinese guerrillas in Malaya.
London and The Hague agreed that the exchange of intelligence should take
place in Singapore and due to the common interests the mutual intelligence
flow started quickly. The Dutch liaison officer used an exclusive code
system for radio communication with The Hague, while a diplomatic
courier was used for shipment of other material.
    The British services produced superior intelligence on the western part
of the republic and on various anti-Sukarno movements in Indonesia. For
Java and the islands in the eastern Indonesian archipelago, the Netherlands
Naval Intelligence Service was in a favourite position to produce
intelligence. The anti-Sukarno movements proved to be very important
intelligence sources. In 1957 they became involved in a struggle for power
in Indonesia. The most important movements were the Darul Islam, the
PRRI on Sumatra and the Permesta on Celebes. Representatives of these
political groups operated in Singapore trying to acquire political and
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                             301

military support from Western countries. Indeed Singapore became an ideal
fishing ground for a professional intelligence officer. A continuous flow of
valuable intelligence reports on the situation in Indonesia, the build-up and
operational readiness of the Indonesian armed forces and the purchase of
foreign military equipment, found its way to London and The Hague.
    Intelligence reports in 1958 unveiled that Poland was about to deliver
Soviet-built destroyers and frigates as well as MiG-17 fighters to Indonesia
and that Czechoslovakia was willing to sell over 100 fighters, bombers and
helicopters. In mid-1958 the Indonesian armed forces began to operate
against the PRRI rebels on the island of Sumatra and in June 1959 the city
of Menado on Celebes was recaptured by the republican troops. In February
1959 a large offensive started against the Permesta in the North Celebes. In
this campaign the recently-delivered Soviet-type aircraft, among others
flown by pilots trained in Egypt, were used for the first time. During the
various actions, the Indonesian forces surprised the world in showing a very
remarkable progress in executing air and amphibious operations.
    Soon, intelligence reports indicated that Indonesia was capable of
carrying out such operations successfully. For the Dutch troops in New
Guinea infiltration actions by Indonesian military units, up to the size of a
battalion, became a real threat. Another lesson was learned from the
operations against the anti-Sukarno rebels: the preparation of these actions
was very difficult to detect. By the end of 1959 the situation of the rebels
worsened as a result of the republican military operations on the islands of
Sumatra and Celebes. The rebellion did not succeed due to the lack of
foreign support. Gradually the policy of the United States, the United
Kingdom and the government of Malaya changed. The visas of the
representatives of the rebellion movements were cancelled upon which
most of them moved to Bangkok. The Dutch intelligence officer was now
forced to maintain under cover contact with his sources.
    In 1959 it was assessed that the pro-Western and popular General
Nasution would be successful in his attempts to change the Indonesian
policy into a more anti-Communist direction. As a result of this the Western
allies began to appease Indonesia and offered him not only political support
but also large amounts of military material which was not particularly
helpful for the Netherlands. The United Kingdom delivered army trucks and
Gannet anti-submarine aircraft and also American, French and Japanese
military salesmen became frequent guests in Jakarta.23
    The successful Dutch intelligence liaison officer in Singapore (1957–60)
was Vice-Admiral (retired) F. E. (Frits) Kruimink (born 1917), a very
remarkable man in the history of Netherlands intelligence. He finished his
study at the Royal Netherlands Naval Institute in April 1940, one month
before the German occupation of the Netherlands. In German internment he
302     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

refused to sign a loyalty declaration and was taken prisoner of war. In 1943
he escaped from the POW camp at Stanislau in Poland and joined the
counter-intelligence group of the Polish Resistance.
    As a member of this organisation he travelled in 1944, via Berlin and
Brussels, to Paris where he joined the FFI (Forces Françaises de 1’Interieur)
the French underground resistance. Until the end of the war he was involved
in intelligence operations against German East-West road and rail troop
movements. In August 1944 he returned to the Netherlands. From 1952
until 1955 he was assigned to the intelligence organisation of the Supreme
Allied Commander Atlantic in Norfolk, Virginia. In 1962, he returned to the
New Guinea conflict area as commanding officer of the anti-submarine
destroyer Hr.Ms. Groningen. From 1964 until 1965 Admiral Kruimink was
head of the Netherlands Naval Intelligence Service. In 1973 he retired as
Vice-Admiral and became, until 1983, Coordinator of the Netherlands
Intelligence and Security Services, a function with a direct responsibility to
the Prime Minister.

THE THREAT A G A I N S T NEW GUINEA I N T E N S I F I E S

In 1958, when the Indonesian threat of a military confrontation against
Netherlands New Guinea intensified, the Commander of the Netherlands
Royal Navy tasked Marid 6 NNG with the responsibility of ‘early warning’
by means of intelligence collection and electronic warfare in case of an
Indonesian attack.24 Because of the limited military capabilities, extremely
long supply lines and the geographical extensiveness of the island,
Netherlands plans for a successful emergency deployment of military units
in the defence of New Guinea were completely dependent on timely
intelligence of enemy plans, state of readiness, forward deployment and
logistic support. Again in the history of the Dutch military presence in South
East Asia, Holland had to rely on Sigint.
    A clear sign of Indonesian intentions was seen in November 1957, when
Dutch companies in Indonesia were boycotted, while the government
initiated mass rallies and confiscation of Dutch properties. The ending
of diplomatic relations was demanded. A message intercepted on 19
December 1957, unveiled that Indonesia was about to confiscate all
ships and other facilities of the Dutch-owned merchant shipping company
KPM, a company with a long history of services in the Indonesian
archipelago.
    The Dutch authorities had to move quickly in order to evacuate all 83
merchant ships out of Indonesian waters. Despite this effort, Indonesia
confiscated 38 merchant ships. For three months Dutch navy ships were
involved in successful operations to recapture the merchant ships. The
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                             303

intelligence support of the naval units involved in these operations proved
to be very adequate and useful.25
    During these operations the working periods of Marid 6 NNG were
extended resulting in a daily average of 267 intercepted Indonesian
messages, half of these were ciphered.26 The cooperation between the WKC
in Amsterdam and Marid 6 NNG at Biak was very intensive. Amsterdam
provided crypto-analysis support and was extensively involved in
intercepting and analysing Indonesian diplomatic and economic radio
traffic. At Biak all available manpower and equipment had to be applied to
focus on military traffic.27
    In 1958 it became clear that Indonesia was preparing for military
operations against Netherlands New Guinea. Intelligence assessments,
among others based on Comint, indicated the Indonesian capability to
conduct small-scale amphibious and air assault operations. In the same year
a 'Front for the liberation of West Irian' was formed. By 1959 Indonesia
was considered to be able to deploy armed forces up to the strength of a
battalion. Not only the Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries
supplied large amounts of military equipment, including, submarines,
destroyers, fast missile-carrying patrol boats and modern offensive aircraft,
but also the United States, the United Kingdom, West Germany and Japan
delivered modern military equipment on a large scale. In the meantime
attempts to break the Indonesian Air Force codes became successful. The
number of intercepted messages increased gradually reaching an overall
daily average of 149 plaintext and 155 ciphered messages in July 1962
when the conflict reached the culminating point.28
    In 1962 the crew list of MARID 6 NNG included 4 officers, 11 non-
commissioned officers, 11 clerks, 2 translators and 22 civilian radio
operators. As mentioned earlier, for the commander of the Dutch armed
forces in New Guinea 'early warning' of Indonesian attempts to infiltrate

                                 FIGURE 9.4
        NUMBERS OF INTERCEPTED INDONESIAN MESSAGES DURING
                     THE NEW GUINEA CONFLICT
       TOTALS AND NUMBERS OF ENCIPHERED MESSAGES (DARK BAR)


                                                                      100,000


                                                                      60,000


                                                                      20,000


     1955    1996     1957    1958    1959    1960    1961     l962
304     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the territory of Netherlands New Guinea was of crucial importance. In 1962
a two-day warning time for a large-scale amphibious assault was considered
to be the minimum requirement for a successful deployment of military
units. In the meantime President Sukarno had given an order to his military
commanders to be ready for action against Netherlands New Guinea by
April that year.

NAVAL ENGAGEMENT NEAR ‘VLAKKE HOEK’
An interesting example of timely and accurate intelligence support is the
operation against Indonesian motor torpedo-boats on 15 January 1962.
Intercepted messages indicated that in the evening hours, from the nearby
Aroe islands, four fast MTB s would attempt to land a unit of 150 marines
on the south coast near Vlakke Hoek.
    Precise data on the deployment of the Indonesian motor torpedo-boats,
the underway refuelling points, the rendezvous embarkation point and the
position of the Indonesian units deployed for diversion purposes was
derived from analysis of intercepted Indonesian messages. Three
Netherlands destroyers were sent to the area in time.
    At 2030 three Indonesian boats were spotted heading north by a Neptune
maritime patrol aircraft. The fourth MTB was forced to withdraw due to
mechanical problems. It was also known that as part of the operation an
Indonesian tank landing ship would be deployed in a more westerly area in
an attempt to deceive the Dutch on-scene-commander. One of the destroyers
on a ‘so-called’ routine patrol spotted the landing ship and sent an ‘open’
flash enemy report. Most probably the Indonesian task group commander
interpreted the message as a confirmation of a successful attempt to mislead
the Dutch units and that he could continue his northerly course towards the
coast of New Guinea undetected and safely. For the Indonesian Navy, the
operation ended in a disaster. Two pre-positioned Dutch destroyers, soon
accompanied by the third one, opened fire at 2100.
    One boat sank immediately, two were badly damaged and reversed
course. Many crew members and embarked marines were killed, among
others the deputy chief of the Indonesian Navy Staff, Commodore Sudarso.
Some 55 survivors were taken prisoner. This time the tactical use of Sigint
prevented Indonesia hoisting a flag on Dutch territory and thus weakening
The Hague’s position at the ongoing United Nations New Guinea
negotiations in New York.29 After the conflict, the Indonesian General
Hidajat declared that it was very remarkable that the Netherlands Navy
knew the position of the Indonesian units. He was convinced then that
treason caused the dramatic failure of the operation.
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                               305

WAR WITH TIED HANDS

Available intelligence could not always be used for military action. In mid-
June 1962 Comint analysis indicated that recently delivered C-130 Hercules
aircraft were being prepared for action on the Indonesian air base of Amahai
on the island of Ceram. Additional intelligence unveiled that the air force
staff at Makassar had a requirement for detailed maps of the area around
Merauke, the most southern town in New Guinea. On 24 June, Netherlands
naval units tracked four C-130s on radar until they dropped 213
paratroopers in the vicinity of Merauke. There were no means available to
intercept or to attack the aircraft before they reached their target. A pre-
emptive strike against Amahai air base, from a military point of view the
most appropriate operation to counter the threat of airborne assaults, was
politically not discussible.30 In 1962 a total of 1,200 Indonesian paratroopers
landed in New Guinea and 340 infiltrators landed by boat.

THE F I N A L E

In the summer of 1962 it became clear that Indonesian armed forces
prepared a large-scale amphibious and air assault against Netherlands New
Guinea, most probably to be launched on 1 August. The operation was
called‘Djajawidjaja’, which means in English:‘Victory over colonialism’.
The Netherlands intelligence organisation was able to produce a reliable and
accurate order of battle of designated units, detailed information on logistic
readiness and the timing of the attack. For some time there has been doubt
about the main target of the assault: Sorong (in Vogelkop) or Biak. The best
intelligence assessment was that Biak, for without its facilities the
Netherlands forces would be crippled, would have the highest Indonesian
priority. After the conflict, Indonesian officers confirmed this assessment.31
    The Indonesian landing force, ATA-17 was organised according to the
US Navy amphibious Task Organisation. The task force commander,
Captain Sudomo, was embarked in the command and control ship Multatuli.
The force consisted of 60 ships, organised as follows:
Task unit 17.1 Battle group    –      2 ex-Soviet‘Skoryy’-class destroyers
                               –      4 ex-West German Jaguar-class MTBs
Task unit 17.2 Escort group    –      2 Italian-built frigates
                               –      2 Italian-built corvettes
                               –      4 ex-US coastal escort vessels
                               –      5 Soviet-built coastal escort vessels
                               –      4 ex-Yugoslavian coastal escort vessels
Task unit 17.3 Transport group –      2 attack troop transport ships
                               –      6 tank landing ships
306     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                                 – 5 cargo ships with landing craft
                                 – 10 cargo ships
Task unit 17.4 Minesweeper       – 4 ex-West German minesweepers
group
Task unit 17.5 Support group     –    4 oil tankers
                                 –    3 ocean going tugs
                                 –    3 hospital ships.32
In mid-1962, 5 of the 12 delivered ex-Soviet‘Whiskey’-class submarines
were considered to have an operational status. At the same time, the
Indonesian Air Force was assessed to have the capability to deploy 10 of the
14 delivered Tupolev-16 bombers and 35 of its arsenal of 50 MiG-17
fighters for offensive operations.33
    Operation‘Djajawidjaja’ was scheduled to be carried out in four phases:
Phase 1 : Actions to gain sea- and air superiority including bombing raids
          against airfields at Biak, Noemfoer, Sorong, Manokwari and
          Kaimana, coastal commando raids and offensive submarine
          patrols.
Phase 2: Assault by a paratrooper brigade at Biak, followed by an
         amphibious assault by marines and army units.
Phase 3: Landings of paratroopers near Sentani as a preparation for the
         attack on Hollandia.
Phase 4: The attack on Hollandia by army units directly after the
         completion of phase 3.34
In 1962, the Netherlands naval forces consisted of 5 modern anti-submarine
destroyers, 2 frigates, 3 submarines, 1 survey vessel, 1 supply ship and 2 oil
tankers. For maritime patrol duties, nine Lockheed Neptune aircraft were
based at Biak. Some 15 Hawker Hunter jets and army anti-aircraft gunnery
elements were responsible for air defence. Five companies of the Royal
Netherlands Marine Corps and three army infantry battalions were available
for ground operations.
    Early in 1962 the Netherlands Commander in New Guinea considered
executing Elint operations, such as done by Nefis in 1947 and 1948, with the
purpose of disrupting the Indonesian communication system in case of a
large-scale attack. Due to the enormous effort necessary to execute this
operation the plan was cancelled.35 The large assault did not take place. It is
difficult to speculate about the tragic military events that would have taken
place if Indonesia had launched the attack. In his memoirs the Indonesian
Admiral Sudomo, in 1962 commanding officer of the main amphibious task
group, speaks about the planned operation as a‘one way ticket’.36
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                                         307

                                      FIGURE 9.5




 Hollandia: Staff buildings Commander Netherlands Forces in New Guinea. The intelligence
 section was located in the centre building.


    The Netherlands historian P. B. R. de Geus concludes that it is out of the
question that the Indonesian armed forces would have been able to carry out
a surprise attack and that, without any doubt, they would have suffered
heavy losses, before reaching their target. Marid 6 at Biak would certainly
have given a timely early warning, enabling the commanding officer of the
Netherlands Forces to deploy his units in the most favourable position to
counter the assault. Most probably Indonesia would have failed to gain a
decisive victory as was demanded by President Sukarno. But the
Netherlands would not have been able to sustain the military confrontation
for a long period.37
    The fact is that on 15 August 1962 at 0930 local time a ceasefire
agreement was signed in Washington. Two days later Marid 6 NNG
intercepted a signal from Jakarta to the Indonesian armed forces containing
the message that Operation‘Djajawidjaja’ was cancelled. Indonesia paid a
high military price for this political success, about 220 infiltrators were
killed in action and 500 were taken prisoner of war.
    Marid 6 at Biak was officially closed at 2400, local time, on 27
September.38 Shortly after this, the crew of 50 men were repatriated leaving
the tropical heat of New Guinea. During the intensifying Cold War in
Europe the need for Sigint remained undiminished and many of them
resumed their employment at the WKC in Amsterdam. In the history of the
Royal Netherlands Navy, the intelligence support of the operations during
308       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

the New Guinea conflict has officially been recorded as outstanding and
decisive for the successful deployment of the limited available assets.

EPILOGUE

At 2300 on 15 August 1962 the agreement between Indonesia and the
Netherlands about the future of the western part of New Guinea was signed
in the presence of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, U-Thant and
the American negotiator Ellsworth Bunker. Former ambassador Bunker
drafted the plan for the agreement.
    Elements of the plan were:
•     the Netherlands will turn over the authority to a Temporary Executive
      Authority under the supervision of Secretary-General of the United
      Nations
•   the Secretary-General nominates a mutual acceptable administrator who
    will be in charge for a period not shorter than one year and no longer
    than two years
•   Netherlands officials will be replaced by UN personnel and after one
    year by Indonesian officials
•   after an undefined period Indonesia will, in cooperation with the United
    Nations, create the possibility for the people of Western New Guinea to
    express their will for self-determination
•   after signing of the agreement diplomatic relations between the
    Netherlands and Indonesia will be restored.39
Part of the agreement was that the hostilities should end on 18 August at
0001 GMT.
    The New Guinea drama was over. In the last part the Netherlands played
only a minor role. Leading actors were Indonesia and the United States.
Sukarno had gambled and won. Obviously President Kennedy granted
Sukarno the political victory, hoping that by doing so Indonesia would not
be pushed into the arms of Moscow. This hope turned out to be vain. One
year later, under the increasing influence of the Soviet Union, President
Sukarno mobilised public opinion in Indonesia for a confrontation with
Malaysia. In 1965 the political situation changed dramatically. An
unsuccessful Communist coup took place in which six Indonesian generals
were killed. The army took over and President Sukarno was relieved from
all his functions.40
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                             309

M O S C O W AND THE NEW GUINEA C O N F L I C T

Situating the conflict in the framework of the East–West confrontation in
the early 1960s it is obvious that both the Soviet Union and the United
States had their own specific interests in Indonesia. In the heat of the
political confrontation, both powers were desperately trying to safeguard
and to extend their influence in the Asian theatre. President Sukarno offered
both parties an ideal and justifiable scenario to support his ambition: the
elimination of the remains of an ancient colonial regime in the Third World.
    The Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries delivered large
quantities of modern war equipment and placed the conflict in the spotlight
of the international warfare of the working class against imperialism.
President Kennedy had to balance carefully between the interests of a small,
opinionated European ally involved in a far from home and unpopular‘post
colonial’conflict and the reality of politics on a global scale. In February
1999 the Moscow correspondent of one of the leading Dutch newspapers De
Volkskrant interviewed three former officers of the Red Fleet. His attention
was drawn by a programme of the Russian national TV station ORT called
‘Kak eto byla’ (How it was) about Indonesia and the New Guinea conflict.
    In this programme it was stated that in 1962 a Soviet military force of 6
‘Whiskey-class’ submarines with auxiliary units, 30 Tupolev-16 bombers
(NATO codename‘Badger’) and a total of 3,000 military personnel was
deployed to Indonesia to operate together with the Indonesian units in the
final assault against New Guinea. Commanding officer of the Soviet force
was Rear-Admiral Tsjernobajs. The orders were to attack Dutch units and
facilities from midnight 1 August. Direct operational control of the Soviet
units was carried out by the Pacific Fleet high command in Vladivostok.
    The three former officers are Aleksey Droegov, who functioned as
Indonesian-Russian translator. Presently he is a member of the Oriental
Institute in Moscow. The second is Rudolf Ryzjikov who was the executive
officer onboard the S-236, one of the six submarines involved. The third
officer is Gennadi Melkov, commanding officer of the submarine S-235 and
presently professor in the faculty of international law at a Moscow
university. The former Soviet Naval Attaché in Washington (1962–66), Y.
Tsoebasjev, confirmed the story. In 1998 he put his findings on paper and
tried to sell it to the Netherlands Embassy in Moscow.41 After the
publication in De Volkskrant, one of the three former Navy officers visited
the Netherlands Defence Attaché in Moscow. He had written down his
personal experience and asked for help to get the story published in the
Netherlands. So far this attempt has remained unsuccessful.
    In 1962 the Netherlands naval intelligence service was aware of the
presence of a large number of Soviet military instructors in the Indonesian
310     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Air Force and Navy. In fact the fast influx of large amounts of modern
military equipment, and the rapid introduction of this material into the
operational elements designated for the assault, could only be carried out
successfully with an extensive support by foreign expertise. However there
is no intelligence available to support the assessment of a direct and large-
scale Soviet participation in the planned operations in 1962. The Director of
the Dutch Institute of Naval History has strong doubts about it.42
Nevertheless the Russian story could be true. After all, First Secretary
Nikita Khrushchev proved to have the courage to provoke the Western
world to the limit in sending missiles to Cuba the same year.

ROYAL N E T H E R L A N D S NAVY SIGINT A C T I V I T I E S IN THE WEST
INDIES

With the transfer of authority to the republic of Indonesia, the Netherlands
naval presence in South East Asia came to an end. For centuries the Dutch
tricolour had ruled the waves in the Indonesian archipelago. This was all
over now and the withdrawal of the Dutch forces also ended the Netherlands
intelligence activities in this part of the world. With the closure of Marid 6
at Biak, the communication intelligence section of the Royal Netherlands
Navy (WKC) in Amsterdam got disposal of some well-experienced Sigint
experts. Finding a job for most of these men was not difficult. At the end of
1962, the need for communication intelligence operations against the Soviet
Union and its allies was growing, not only in Europe but also in the
remaining Dutch national overseas area of interest, the Netherlands Antilles
in the Caribbean.
    The military tension in this region caused a growing concern about the
safety of this part of the Kingdom. After the successful revolution in Cuba,
Fidel Castro was very clear about his ambition to extend his influence in the
area and to export the Marxist victory. In 1962 the world almost witnessed
the prelude of World War III when the Soviet Union deployed offensive
weapons as a direct threat to the United States on Cuban soil. The territorial
defence of the Netherlands Antilles has always been a responsibility of the
Royal Netherlands Navy. The main facility is the naval base at Willemstad
on the island of Curaçao. The military presence consists mainly of a frigate-
type station ship, maritime patrol aircraft and units of the Netherlands
Marine Corps.
    In 1963 a decision was taken by the Commander-in-Chief of the Royal
Netherlands Navy to improve the intelligence position by establishing the
‘Radio Control Service Netherlands Antilles’ at Curaçao. Research had
proved the good possibilities for Comint collection. Especially the
communication network of the Venezuelan armed forces offered attractive
DUTCH SIGINT AND THE CONFLICT WITH INDONESIA                                            311

opportunities for intelligence collection. Venezuela never posed a direct
military threat to the Netherlands Antilles. But it is obvious that, due to an
unstable internal political situation and the fact that the Dutch Leeward
Islands Curaçao, Bonaire and Aruba are situated within the Venezuelan
economic sphere of influence, the Netherlands Navy Intelligence Service
had its interests in Caracas. Beside this, in 1963 the Venezuelan armed
forces had the potential capability for offensive, overseas operations.
Civilian and military communication personnel from the WKC in
Amsterdam manned the new communication intelligence site. Technical
problems were caused by the fact that in the beginning the site had to use
the antennas of the Navy world-network which were mainly aimed at
Europe.
    Despite this it was possible to obtain a reliable order of battle of target
countries in the area by monitoring military communication networks. Not
only the communication network of the Venezuelan armed forces was
successfully intercepted but also the Cuban diplomatic network. Another
task of the Sigint site was to monitor the high frequency world net of the
Soviet Navy, mainly with the purpose of completing the material collected
in the Netherlands. Targets were Soviet Navy communications facilities in
Vladivostok and Tashkent and the Soviet Navy support facilities in Angola
and at Port Mariel in Cuba. The geographical dispersion offered good
interception results and provided reliable positional data of inter-fleet ship
movements. During the Falklands War the station was capable of providing
a good insight into its dramatic events.
    Despite the successes, the radio monitor station at Curaçao was closed,
mainly for budgetary reasons. On 1 July 1990 the overseas Sigint activities
of the Royal Netherlands Navy came to an end. What started in 1933 in
Batavia when Japan prepared for war ended 57 years later when Fidel
Castro lost the support of the Soviet Union and consequently his appetite to
export his glorious revolution.43

                                          NOTES

 1. Karl de Leeuw,‘Henri Koot’, Biographical Dictionnaire (Institute for Netherlands History,
    The Hague) version 2 Sept. 1998.
 2. J.F.W. Nuboer, Marineblad 1981, No. 6, p.268.
 3. Ibid. p.269.
 4. Ibid. p.271.
 5. Robert D. Haslach, Nishi no kaze hare (Weesp: Van Kampen & Zn 1990) p.77.
 6. Ibid.
 7. F.T.S. van der Laan, Marineblad 1992, No. 12, p.459.
 8. K.W.L. Bezemer, Verdreven doch niet verslagen (Hilversum 1967) p.1.
 9. Ibid. p.184.
10. M.W. Jensen and G. Platje, De Marid (Den Haag: SDU 1997) p.73.
11. Ibid. Chapter 6.
312       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

12.  Ibid. p.75.
13.  Interview with J.F. Bastiaans, 23 July 1998.
14.  Jensen and Platje, De Marid (note 10) p.76.
15.  The Netherlands Military Intelligence Agency, Marid VI/Wiskundig Centrum 1947–1965,
     Top Secret, 31 Oct. 1965. S.Marid 6110/000780/65/ZG (hereafter History WKC/TIVC) p.38.
16. History WKC/T1VC (note 15) p.7.
17. Interview with J.F. Bastiaans, 23 July 1998.
18. History WKC/TIVC (note 15) p.21.
19. Ibid. p.39.
20. Ibid. p.43.
21. Jensen and Platje, De Marid (note 10) p.94.
22. Ibid. p.137.
23. Ibid. pp.135–7.
24. Ibid. p.lll.
25. Jensen and Platje, De Marid (note 10) p.117.
26. History WKC/TIVC (note 15) p.44.
27. Ibid.
28. History WKC/TIVC (note 15) pp.45 and 174.
29. R.E. van Holst Pellekaan, I.C. de Regt, and J.F. Bastiaans, Patrouilleren voor de Papoea’s:
     de Koninklijke Marine in Nederlands Nieuw-Guinea, 2 vols. (Amsterdam 1989–90)
     pp.112–18.
30. Jensen and Platje, De Marid (note 10) p.141.
31. Ibid. p.143.
32. Pellekaan, Regt and Bastiaans, Patrouilleren voor de Papoea’s (note 29) p.81.
33. Interview with J.F. Bastiaans, 7 Oct. 1999.
34. Pellekaan, Regt and Bastiaans, Patrouilleren voor de Papoea’s (note 29) p.80.
35. Interview with J.F. Bastiaans, 7 Oct. 1999.
36. Pellekaan, Regt and Bastiaans, Patrouilleren voor de Papoea’s (note 29) p. 156.
37. Ibid.
38. History WKC/TIVC (note 15) p.47.
39. Pellekaan, Regt and Bastiaans, Patrouilleren voor de Papoea’s (note 29) p.16.
40. Ibid. p.21.
41. Bart Rijs,‘Moskou beraamde in‘62 aanval op Nieuw-Guinea’, De Volkskrant, 10 Feb. 1999.
42. ‘Historici aarzelen over Sovjet-onderzeeërs’, De Volkskrant, 11 Feb. 1999.
43. Jensen and Platje, De Marid (note 10) pp.238–41 and 301–2.
                                      10
                             Conclusions

            MATTHEW AID and CEES WIEBES




The central question raised in this work is this: what were the important
contributions made to the security of the United States, Canada and various
nations of Western Europe by Sigint? The writing of this study was
motivated by the desire of the authors to fill the void that currently exists in
the public literature regarding the role and importance of Sigint in the years
after the end of World War II. By the same token, the purpose of this study
was also to broaden in a profound way the public’s knowledge about the
role of Sigint in countries outside of the United States. In order to realise
this goal, we have chosen to follow a multinational and more comparative
approach.
    In our view, there has been too much‘intelligence history snobbery’. To
date, the focus of most intelligence studies was the role and activities of the
world’s largest intelligence services, such as those of the United States and
the former Soviet Union. The writers of this work have tried to construct a
new approach regarding intelligence history. We think that in the future,
serious academic historical studies dealing with all aspects of intelligence
should be far more‘internationalist’in approach, taking into account the
accomplishments of the world’s smaller services, from whom the world’s
larger intelligence organisations derived much of their information during
the Cold War. In this regard, one can even postulate that it is impossible to
write a comprehensive history of American or Soviet intelligence activities
during the Cold War without talking at the same time about the liaison
relationships with their partners around the world. For instance, in much
that has been written in the past the Canadian and European Sigint
organisations have usually been portrayed as subordinate entities acting in
lockstep under the leadership and tutelage of the National Security Agency.
In fact, this publication and other recently declassified documents clearly
shows for the first time that the Sigint sharing relationships between the US,
314     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Canada and the European allies during the Cold War were far more
complicated than previously known.
    Each of the authors has given in this work a sketch of the establishment
and growth of the national Sigint service that they were asked to write
about. Important matters like successes, failures, national acceptance,
international cooperation, intra-European liaison, budgetary problems,
national rivalry and targeting have been dealt with extensively. The purpose
of this final contribution is to draw these national experiences together and
try to present a coherent picture of what we deem to be the primary
revelations stemming from this study.

C O M M O N GROUND

There were certain common threads that bound the United States, Britain,
Canada and their Western European allies together in their collective Sigint
effort against the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies.
    The first thread was the jointly held belief with the intelligence
communities of the US and European partners that the Soviet Union
and its allies posed a real and substantive military threat to the security
of Western Europe. As such, all of the nations that are discussed in this
work, even those who were nominally neutral, devoted the vast majority
of their Sigint collection resources to monitoring the military and
political activities of the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies. For
example, throughout the Cold War the percentage of NSA’s collection
resources dedicated to monitoring the Soviet Union never fell under the
50 per cent mark. The figures of America’s European Sigint allies,
although still a secret, were almost certainly higher. For example, it is
rumoured that the Norwegian collection resources still dedicates about 80
per cent of its resources to monitoring the former Soviet Union and its
allies. The same probably holds true for the Danish and Swedish Sigint
organisations.1
    The second thread that bound the UKUSA Comint organisations
together throughout the Cold War was mutual dependence on each other.
The period of fiscal austerity following World War II forced the US and
Britain to pool their limited Comint resources in order to cover the Soviet
Union and its allies in Europe and Asia. This led to the 1946 revision of the
wartime British-US Comint Agreement (or BRUSA). This was followed by
a more inclusive Comint sharing and collaboration agreement signed in
June 1948 called the UK-USA Comint Agreement (or UKUSA), which
added the nascent Comint organisations of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand but retained Britain as the dominant partner among the
Commonwealth nations.
CONCLUSIONS                                                                315
    Throughout the Cold War the complex and interlocking relationships
between the UKUSA nations were so close that it was (and remains today)
difficult to separate them into individual and distinct national intelligence
collection efforts. Referring to the intimate Sigint relationship between the
US and Great Britain, the former British ambassador to the United States,
Sir Peter Ramsbotham, said in 1976 that‘We have all grown so accustomed
to the closeness of the relationship between our two countries, that those of
us who live and work in the United States have come to take it for granted.’2
    The relationship between NSA and GCHQ became so closely
interwoven that it was oftentimes difficult for American and British
intelligence officials to determine whether the SIGINT reports they were
reading every morning came from NSA or GCHQ.3 An 28 April 1948
memorandum from the chief the US Air Force Air Intelligence
Requirements Division reported that‘At the present time, there is complete
interchange of communications intelligence between the cognisant United
States and British agencies. It is not believed that the present arrangements
on the interchange of this information could be improved.’4
    There was also a parallel Elint sharing relationship between the three US
military services and their British military counterparts. In the summer of
1951, GCHQ entered the Elint collection field. Specifically, GCHQ was
given control over the Elint intercept units in the field, and was responsible
for transmitting the collected intercepts to a unit in London called the
Technical Radio Investigation Committee (TRIC) for analysis and
reporting. TRIC was also responsible for providing finished Elint
intelligence reports to the US Navy and Air Force‘Special Intelligence
Exchange Officers’assigned to the Ministry of Defence in London.5 It was
not until 1958 that NSA was given operational control of the American
national Elint effort by virtue of a National Security Council directive.6
    As Richard Aldrich wrote in his contribution on British signals
intelligence, the intimate intelligence collaboration between the US and
Britain extended to sensitive submarine reconnaissance missions performed
off the coast of the Soviet Union and its allies. There was also close
collaboration between the CIA and FBI on one hand, and the foreign
intelligence and internal security services of Britain on the other in the field
of clandestine intelligence collection of foreign cryptographic systems.
    The Sigint sharing and collaborative relationships between the UKUSA
‘First Party’ nations, namely the US and Britain, and the Sigint units of the
‘Second Party’ states of Canada, Australia and New Zealand were
somewhat more limited. For example, the terms of the 1948 Canadian– US
Communications Intelligence Agreement (CANUSA) was nowhere near as
generous as the comparable 1946 BRUSA COMINT agreement between
the US and Britain. The CANUSA Agreement limited the exchange of
316     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Comint translations and gists among the two countries to a ‘need to know’
basis because, as one American official at the time argued: ‘The Canadians
have no information to exchange.’The Canadians reluctantly agreed to the
American terms (in truth they had no choice but to accept), and CANUSA
was born in June 1948.7
    The relationship between the US and the UK on one hand and the so-
called UKUSA ‘Third Party’nations was even more limited. During the
1950s, the US and Britain signed a series of bilateral Sigint sharing
agreements with European and Asian countries. Declassified documents
show that by the mid-1950s, the US and Britain had established formal
bilateral Sigint collaboration and sharing agreements with Norway,
Denmark, West Germany, Italy, and Turkey in Europe; and Pakistan,
Burma, Thailand, the Republic of China (Taiwan) and South Korea in Asia.8
In the mid-1960s, additional foreign Sigint organisations became UKUSA
Third Parties, including those of Austria, Greece, South Vietnam, the
Philippines and Japan.9
    The strategic value of these countries to the UKUSA Sigint community
was largely due to their geographic location adjacent to the Soviet Union,
Eastern Europe and China. For example, the Sigint sites in northern Norway
provided unique and invaluable access to Soviet military communications
emanating from the Kola Peninsula. Danish Sigint sites were perfectly
situated to provide in-depth coverage of Soviet and Polish military activities
in and around the Baltic Sea. The multitude of Sigint stations in West
Germany and West Berlin permitted unparalleled access to radio traffic
emanating from East Germany, Poland and Czechoslovakia. The best Sigint
coverage of communications traffic coming from eastern Czechoslovakia,
Hungary and northern Yugoslavia was obtained from Austria, which
complemented the Sigint coverage obtained from Italy and Greece. Turkey
was perfectly positioned geographically to allow unfettered Sigint coverage
of military radio traffic coming from the much of the Balkans as well as
much of the southern Soviet Union.
    Some nominally neutral European states that were not UKUSA Third
Parties informally engaged in Sigint collaboration and/or information
sharing with the UKUSA nations. For example, there was some Sigint co-
operation between the French and the US during the first war in Indochina
in the 1950s, despite the fact that France was not a signatory to the UKUSA
agreement. In return for direction-finding bearings from the Army Security
Agency listening post at Clark Air Base in the Philippines, the French
provided the American embassy in Saigon with copies of their Sigint reports
on Viet Minh military activities.10
    Despite being a member of NATO and possessing a small but
accomplished Sigint service, the Dutch never joined UKUSA despite
CONCLUSIONS                                                              317
repeated requests to participate. As detailed in Dr Wiebes’study on the
Netherlands, the Sigint service of Dutch Naval Intelligence, the TIVC, did
accept relatively small amounts of financial and technical assistance from
their American counterparts, but succeeded in maintaining its full
independence throughout the Cold War. This also pertained to the Sigint
services of the Dutch Army and Air Force.
    Nominally neutral Sweden (who some European officials referred to
during the Cold War as‘the secret member of NATO’) maintained a close
working relationship with the US and Britain in the Sigint field throughout
much of the Cold War, but managed to retain its independence despite the
somewhat intimate nature of the relationship.11 During the 1940s and 1950s,
US military attachés based in Stockholm were routinely given the results of
Sweden’s Sigint efforts against the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies
by senior officials in the Swedish Defence Staff. For instance, as early as
January 1949 the Swedish Defence Staff was passing to American and
British military attachés in Stockholm the results of their ELINT collection
efforts against Soviet radars in the Baltic Sea region.12 In April 1951
Swedish military intelligence officials gave the US military attaché the
results of Sweden’s Sigint monitoring of a large Soviet air defence exercise
conducted in Soviet Karelia north of Leningrad (now St Petersburg).13
    Informal liaison between the Swedish Comint organisation, the FRA, and
GCHQ continued well into the 1960s, including a joint operation to spy on
the Russian cruiser Ordzhonikidze during her visit to Sweden in 1959.14 In
1959, the FRA agreed to provide GCHQ with copies of Soviet military
intelligence (GRU) messages transmitted by Russian spymasters from Britain
during World War II that had been intercepted by the Swedes.15 In 1969 a
covert listening post operated by the CIA’s Office of Elint on the Swedish
island of Gotland, called‘Briar Patch’, intercepted the first emissions from
the Soviet‘Hen House’missile early warning radar at Skrunda in Latvia.16
Vice Admiral Bobby Inman, who had served as naval attaché in Stockholm,
worked hard to improve relations with Sweden when he was the head of the
Office of Naval Intelligence from 1974 to 1976. This assistance included
helping to get secret US funding for a new Swedish spy ship called the Orion,
which was commissioned in 1984. The quid pro quo was that the intelligence
information generated by the Orion was to be shared with the US.17
    But as time went by, NSA grew increasingly large and powerful,
reaching almost 100,000 men and women by the late 1960s. But the other
UKUSA member organisations were not able to match the size and scope of
NSA’s worldwide Sigint collection efforts. Starting in the 1950s, fiscal
austerity and operational considerations forced all of the Second Party
UKUSA Comint organisations to scale back their Sigint intercept and
cryptanalytic activities. Budget cuts forced GCHQ to cut back on the scale
318     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

of its Sigint collection operations during the 1950s and 1960s, forcing the
financially-strapped British Sigint Agency to become increasingly
dependent on NSA for money and high-tech equipment.18 In a harsh
assessment of the changing dynamics of the US-British Sigint relationship,
two British authors wrote:‘From a post-Second World War partnership of
equals it [the UKUSA relationship between NSA and GCHQ] has evolved
into a master-servant arrangement of convenience.’19
    In 1957 Canada’s CBNRC ceased conducting cryptanalytic work,
reducing Canada to the position of being a mere supplier of intercepts for
NSA and GCHQ. Because it had no cryptanalytic capability, the Canadian
Sigint organisation had to rely on NSA to process and analyse much of the
materials collected by the Canadians. As the Scandinavian contribution by
Alf Jacobsen showed, the Norwegian Defence Intelligence Staff (FO/E)
also ceased its cryptanalytic efforts in the late 1950s because of the poor
results coming out of the effort, making the FO/E almost completely
dependent on NSA for high-level intelligence derived from Comint. In
some cases, the degree of dependence on the US took on alarming
proportions. For example, by 1970 about 80 per cent of the budget for the
Norwegian Sigint effort was being secretly paid for by the US. This contrasts
with other European countries like Germany, France and the Netherlands,
where cryptanalytic work was continued and is flourishing today.
    But some members of UKUSA, however, have over time become
accustomed to being dependent on the US for leadership and resources.
Indeed, some have arguably even benefited from it. The seductive power of
access to American fiscal power and technological wherewithal is indeed
addictive. Former British intelligence official Michael Herman has written
that‘ F o r Britain and others, access to the United States’weight of
resources, technology and expertise is an overwhelming attraction.’20 The
relative decline in strength and capabilities of GCHQ since World War II
has meant that over time the British have increasingly obtained more out of
the special relationship with NSA than they have contributed. Naturally, this
means that over time Britain has become even more‘strongly wedded to the
special relationship’with NSA.21 The 2000 annual report of the British
Parliamentary Intelligence and Security Committee revealed that‘ T h e
quality of the intelligence gathered [by GCHQ] clearly reflects the value of
the close coordination under the UKUSA agreement.’22
    But fear of being‘marginalised’out of UKUSA because of diminished
capacity and resources scared the British intelligence community during the
1970s and 1980s. An in-house GCHQ document, entitled the‘Strategic
Direction Summary’, argued that GCHQ’s contribution to UKUSA had to
be necessarily‘ o f sufficient scale and of the right kind to make a
continuation of the Sigint alliance worthwhile to our partners’.23
CONCLUSIONS                                                               319
    Subsidisation of the British Sigint effort, direct and indirect, appears to
have been more pervasive than previously believed. In the early 1980s, all
of the UKUSA Sigint organisations adopted the R-2174 HF intercept
receiver made by the British defence contractor Racal for use at all HF
intercept stations around the world. This was done despite the fact that
American defence contractors had offered NSA better and less expensive
equipment.24
    In the case of Canada, as shown by Martin Rudner, NSA provided the
Canadian Sigint organisation with the latest Sigint equipment, trained
Canadian personnel, and gave the Canadian Sigint organisation entrée to
some of NSA’s most sophisticated and sensitive operations.
    There were tangible benefits for UKUSA’s ‘Third Party’members as
well. The US secretly provided tens of millions of dollars of assistance in
the form of training and equipment for the Third Party Sigint units. For
example, during the late 1950s and early 1960s, the German BND and its
Sigint service took advantage of American largesse to get the US taxpayer
to foot the bill for building and equipping a huge Sigint intercept site in
Augsburg. In the Netherlands, the Dutch Sigint service was more than
happy to accept the American gift in the form of a Granger HF intercept
antenna at the Eemnes listening post, which is still intercepting diplomatic
and military HF traffic today. In the late 1960s, the Italian Navy manned
what superficially looked like fishing boats equipped with Sigint and other
technical intelligence collection gear supplied by the US Navy’s Office of
Naval Intelligence (ONI). These boats were used to covertly monitor Soviet
naval activities in the Mediterranean.25
    In some cases, Third Party Sigint personnel worked side by side with
their American counterparts at NSA listening posts, such as in West
Germany, Turkey, Thailand, and South Korea. In the 1960s, Turkish Sigint
personnel were integrated into the Army listening post at Sinop, Turkey,
where they performed many of the same Comint intercept and processing
tasks as their American counterparts.26 Also NSA eavesdroppers were
sometimes welcome on board Dutch ships, or could operate on Dutch
territory, such as from the Dutch-controlled islands in the Caribbean. The
same happened in a not so neutral Sweden, where from the 1950s American
personnel worked hand in hand with the Swedish Sigint service. NSA
officials even reportedly participated in Swedish Sigint flights over the
Baltic Sea.27
    But the pricetag for taking NSA’s money and equipment was the
inevitable loss of independence for the UKUSA member organisations.
NSA typically demanded and got virtually all of the intercepts collected by
its partner agencies. By the mid-1980s, some British authors suggest that
GCHQ had become nothing more than an extension of NSA, with an
320     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

internal GCHQ document stating This may entail on occasion the applying
of UK [Sigint] resources to the meeting of US requirements.’28 A former
USAF Sigint analyst wrote that the Third Party nations received‘absolutely
no material from us, while we get anything they have, although generally
it’s of pretty low quality’.29
     NSA also could largely dictate which targets they wanted their allies to
cover, which inevitably meant a focus on the Soviet Union at the expense of
targets of interest to the nations in question. An example of this loss of
independence can be found in the section of this study dealing with
Scandinavia. Another good example is the case of the West German Sigint
services, which strove mightily to preserve their independence from NSA
and GCHQ. It was only when the BND and the West German military began
to dramatically expand their Sigint infrastructure during the 1970s that the
Germans reluctantly sought NSA’s financial and technical assistance. A step
taken solely because they discovered that the cost for a sophisticated Sigint
collection infrastructure was too high to try to‘ g o it alone’. The cost of
accepting NSA’s help was the loss of a certain degree of their independence,
as well as having to agree to NSA requests, such as providing NSA with
more raw Sigint materials.
     A third thread was the fact that by the early 1950s, NSA, GCHQ and the
other UKUSA Sigint organisations were producing intelligence on what
Richard Aldrich has described in his contribution as‘ a n industrial scale’.
Unlike the CIA, MI6 and other Western Humint organisations, the UKUSA
Sigint organisations pioneered the use of the still nascent computer and
electronic technologies. They continued the process begun during World
War II of turning out intelligence on an assembly line basis, using as their
model Henry Ford’s automobile production plants in Detroit, Michigan. As
a result, the UKUSA Sigint organisations quickly became more efficient
and efficacious producers of intelligence than their better-known
counterparts in the Western intelligence communities. This made Sigint
production organisations an attractive showcase for other European nations
who wished to participate in the Western intelligence community.
     While many Western European nations dedicated the majority of their
intelligence resources to Sigint collection, such as the Scandinavian
countries of Norway, Sweden and Denmark, other European countries
invested most of their resources in Human Intelligence (Humint). For
example, this study has shown that the West Germany intelligence service,
the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND), backed by the CIA, dedicated the vast
majority of its resources to Humint collection at the expense of Sigint. It
was not until the retirement in April 1968 of the BND’s founder, General
Reinhard Gehlen, that the BND dramatically shifted its emphasis from
Humint to Sigint collection.
CONCLUSIONS                                                                321
    For its part, the West German military, the Bundeswehr, began to build up
its Sigint collection capabilities after the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. We have
also seen in the contribution on France by Roger Faligot that the French
intelligence service, the SDECE, did not begin investing heavily in Sigint
collection until the 1970s. This collection also showed that the situation in
the Netherlands differed somewhat compared to other nations in that much
more money was poured into its Sigint endeavours than into Humint.
    As said earlier, in much that has been written in the past about the
UKUSA Sigint agreement, the member organisations are often portrayed as
a single monolithic entity acting in lockstep under the leadership of NSA.
In fact, this collection and other recently declassified documents for the first
time prove that the Sigint sharing relationship between the US, Canada and
the European UKUSA allies during the Cold War was far more complicated
than previously known.
    Often, the US imposed severe limits on what, if any Sigint it was willing
to share with its European allies. There were even limits on American Sigint
collaboration with Britain. A series of 1949 American decrypts of Czech
internal security messages detailing the arrest of a number of US Army
Counterintelligence Corps agents in Czechoslovakia were all marked ‘THIS
MATERIAL TO BE SEEN BY US PERSONNEL ONLY’in order to keep
news of these Humint failures away from the British.30 In March 1954, the
US Far East Command in Tokyo was authorised for the first time to share
Comint information with British intelligence officers serving on the
command’s intelligence staff in Tokyo. However, American intelligence
officials were ordered to excise (with scissors) any technical information
from the materials that were to be given to British, which presumably would
include such technical data as frequencies being monitored, date and time
of intercept, case notation information, etc.31
    Moreover, it was not until the summer of 1954 that Far East Command
was permitted to give Elint reports to the British naval attaché in Tokyo, but
Washington only permitted the release of finished intelligence reports
classified no higher than Secret and only for the Far East theatre.
Furthermore, the material was to be released only on a quid pro quo basis,
meaning that the British in return had to give Far East Command the results
of their Elint collection efforts in the region, and allow American military
intelligence officials access to their Elint facilities in the region. The Top
Secret Elint materials generated by Far East Command, which included a
great deal more technical detail than was contained in the Secret reports,
were specifically barred to the British intelligence representatives in the Far
East. The Pacific was, after all, an‘American Lake’.32 British personnel who
worked at the American listening post at RAF Chicksands, England, were
barred from entering the part of the listening post called Joint Operations
322     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Center, Chicksands (JOCC), which was manned by NSA civilians and
USAF intercept personnel.33
    NSA did not have a monopoly on this sort of behaviour. Britain’s GCHQ
also withheld information from NSA. For example, after the end of World
War II GCHQ refused to give to the US sensitive decrypts of Soviet
clandestine radio traffic between Moscow and the Soviet mission with Mao
Tse-tung’s Chinese Communist forces at Yenan. It was not until March 1946
that GCHQ began sending a single copy of these translated decrypts to
Washington, but on the condition that they were to be read only by the
deputy chief of US Army Intelligence, General Carter Clarke.34
    Not surprisingly, NSA’s treatment of its‘Third Party’Comint allies was
often even worse. The sharing of Sigint with the UKUSA ‘Third Party’
Comint organisations was far more restricted because of security
considerations. For example, West German intelligence officials complained
about being treated as second-class citizens by NSA in their own country.
German Sigint personnel stationed at NSA’s Augsburg listening post in West
Germany found that their requests for direction-finding missions were
almost always placed behind American tasks, and they were denied access to
large parts of the station by American security officials.
    Sigint sharing between the US and France was terminated in the 1960s
after it was discovered that the French foreign intelligence organisation, the
SDECE, had been penetrated by the KGB. Sigint sharing with France was
not resumed until a decade later.35
    Moreover, the Dutch intelligence community was not pleased with the
unwillingness of the US to fully share Sigint with it. But in all fairness, the
Dutch were also not pleased by the reluctance of GCHQ to share the results
of their Sigint operations, such as during the Dutch colonial struggle with
Indonesia over New Guinea in the 1950s and 1960s.
    There have also been numerous complaints from America’s allies that
NSA got far more from its European partners than it gave in return. One
specific complaint that is still often heard from European intelligence
officials is that NSA was not particularly forthcoming when it came to
passing to its allies high-level intelligence derived from Comint.36 A British
analyst recently wrote that:‘America’s allies have long complained that it
is particularly mean with its intelligence.’37 A former senior Norwegian
intelligence official, Knut Willy Kval, was quoted as saying that‘[W]here
it was not in the interest of NSA that we should possess cryptographic
insight, they did not have to share such matters with us.’38 In 1951, the
Dutch Sigint Agency stopped the weekly shipment of raw intercepts of
Soviet radio and telegraph to the CIA station in The Hague because NSA’s
predecessor organisation, the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA),
refused to provide the Dutch with the results of its analysis of these
CONCLUSIONS                                                               323
messages. These complaints continue to this day. Intelligence officials
working for the United Nations verification mission in Iraq (UNSCOM)
complained often that they were forwarding to the US all of the raw Sigint
they were collecting inside Iraq, but getting little back.39
    What America’s European allies did not realise was that the order to not
provide the NATO allies with Sigint came from the very top. A declassified
USAF intelligence document revealed that:‘The National Security Council
does not want the end product of USAFSS [US Air Force Security Service]
operations to be given to foreign nations in NATO commands. It is
recognized that most of the NATO member nations will benefit from
USAFSS operations. Officially, the NATO member nations, with the
exception of Great Britain [editor’s emphasis], will not be given the details
of USAFSS operations although they must realise, unofficially, how and
where the end product was secured.’40
    Another problem area, and thereby a fourth thread, was that NSA has in
the past, and continues to this day to conduct its Sigint sharing relationships
on a bilateral country-by-country basis, with some of NSA’s partners getting
more information and resources from NSA than others depending on
geopolitical and geographic considerations. For example, the Norwegian
intelligence service was treated particularly well by the US because the
telemetry intelligence that was collected by Norwegian listening posts from
Soviet missile and space launches at Plesetsk and Soviet naval missile test
firings from Nenoksa in the White Sea were deemed to be invaluable by the
US intelligence community.41 Other nations, such as Italy and Greece, were
not treated as well. These bilateral relationships led to considerable
resentment on the part of those countries who were the‘have-nots’against
those who were particularly favoured by NSA, with some European
intelligence chiefs believing that NSA was playing one partner organisation
off against the others.42
    This problem remains to this day. During the war in Bosnia between
 1992 and 1995, and during the 1999 war in Kosovo, NSA experienced
serious problems sharing intelligence information with its NATO allies
during the conflict, in large part because many of these partners were not
members of UKUSA. Bill Nolte, formerly the head of NSA’s Legislative
Affairs office, stated that‘compartmentalization of intelligence doesn’t
really work anymore in modern coalition operations and complained about
the current problems of getting NSA to modernize both its practices and
mentality’.43
     One avenue that the European nations pursued in order to maintain at
least a modicum of independence from NSA and UKUSA was to establish
separate Sigint-sharing arrangements with other European countries outside
the UKUSA framework. For example, Britain and France have shared
324     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Sigint information with each other, albeit not consistently, despite the fact
that France left NATO in 1966 and has never been a member of UKUSA.
French Sigint reportedly proved useful to London during the 1982
Falklands War, and there has also been increased sharing of Sigint between
the two countries regarding international terrorism since the 1970s.44
    The essay on French Sigint by Roger Faligot in this collection showed
that France also maintained a separate bilateral Sigint sharing relationship
with the German foreign intelligence service, the BND. From the late 1960s,
the Dutch Air Force Sigint organisation established an unofficial Sigint
sharing relationship with its counterparts in the West German Air Force,
while the Dutch Army Sigint cooperated with the BND and the West
German Army to locate clandestine radio transmitters operating inside East
Germany. Today, the level of cooperation between the Dutch Sigint
community and its counterparts in Germany and France is growing at a rapid
pace. Up until they joined NATO in 1949, Norway and Denmark maintained
a particularly close Sigint-sharing relationship with neutral Sweden.
    Another means used by UKUSA ‘Third Party’nations to maintain a
semblance of independence was to keep NSA and GCHQ out of their
countries. The most successful practitioners of this were the Scandinavian
nations of Norway and Denmark, who despite becoming members of
UKUSA in the 1950s, insisted on running their own intelligence operations
and did not permit foreign Sigint personnel to operate on their soil. Also the
Netherlands and France remained‘ f r e e ’from any American intrusion on
their territory. However, this did not preclude these nations from taking
American equipment and money in return for providing NSA with raw
intercepts.
    It may come as a shock for many reading this book to learn that the
intelligence chiefs of many of the European Sigint organisations sometimes
kept many of the details of their intelligence collaboration with the US and
Great Britain a secret from senior civilian officials in their own
governments. For example, the first American Sigint sites in Turkey were
established pursuant to a secret agreement between American military
officials in Ankara and the Chief of the Turkish General Staff, General Nuri
Yamut. No Turkish civilian government officials were informed of the
secret agreement. This meant that senior American military officials in
Turkey had to remind their colleagues back in Washington‘ . . . not to
mention [this agreement] in any discussions with Turkish political or
diplomatic authorities’.45
    In another poignant example, in 1954 the US Air Force attaché in
Copenhagen entered into an oral agreement with the head of the Danish
Defence Intelligence Service (FET), which allowed USAF RB-50G ‘Ferret’
aircraft to secretly overfly Denmark without the knowledge or consent of the
CONCLUSIONS                                                              325
Danish government. In May 1954, the head of the FET, Colonel Hans
Mathiesen Lunding, informed the US Air Attaché in Copenhagen that he was
willing to assist the US in facilitating overflights of Denmark by American
Ferret aircraft, which could not be cleared through normal political channels
because of‘security considerations’. This meant that Danish political and
diplomatic officials were not to be trusted. These ‘Ferret’ flights, codenamed
‘Fluorescent’, flew over the Danish island of Zealand on their way to and
from the Baltic Sea, all the time covered by a Comint collection aircraft of
the Royal Danish Air Force (RDAF), which monitored communications
between East German radar stations. The standard procedure for the
‘Fluorescent’ missions called for the US air attaché in Copenhagen to submit
a request for the overflight to Colonel Lunding, who in turn would inform
the commander of the Danish Air Force of the impending USAF flight.
Colonel Lunding, his deputy, the commander of the RDAF and his deputy
would then monitor Danish military communications circuits to prevent
reports of the American overflights of Denmark from being disseminated
within the Danish military or government.46
    A fifth thread was the independent use of Sigint by various European
powers in their colonial wars. The contribution on Dutch Sigint in Indonesia
by Wies Platje demonstrates how Sigint did yield excellent results of great
use to Dutch military and political decisionmakers. It also showed that
Sigint and Humint must work hand in hand in order to obtain excellent
results. The successful French Comint collection effort against the Viet
Minh in Indochina by the Services Techniques de Recherches (STR) is also
worth mentioning. Also the French eavesdroppers were quite successful
during the early stages of the war in Algeria.
    And in recent years, as was demonstrated in the study on France, French
special operations in Africa continued unabated under President Mitterrand.
In 1987, the operation to combat Colonel Gaddafi’s Libyan troops in Chad,
Operation‘Epervier’, was supervised by elite intelligence personnel from
the French Army. Also involved in these operations were French Navy
Breguet Atlantic Sigint collection aircraft. A Breguet Atlantic aircraft was
used by the French as a mobile headquarters. The intercepted Libyan
transmissions monitored by the aircraft were immediately decoded and
translated by Arabic linguists, which permitted more accurate and efficient
attacks on the Libyan forces.
    Less is know about the British Sigint successes and failures during the
various uprisings in their colonial possessions in Asia and the Middle East.
This issue is a topic for further future research by intelligence historians.
    A sixth thread was the issue of the extreme political sensitivity in many
of the West European nations concerning their intelligence collaboration
with the US and Britain, especially in Scandinavia. For example, there was
326     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

a close bilateral Sigint-sharing relationship between the US and Norway, as
memorialised in two agreements signed in 1952 and 1954, which made
Norway an integral part of the UKUSA network. But while the working
relationship between NSA and the CIA on one hand and the Norwegian
military intelligence organisation, the FO/E, on the other hand was quite
close, the political leaders of Norway were constantly fearful that this
relationship would become a matter of public record. For instance,
following the Soviet downing of a US Air Force RB-47 Elint aircraft off the
Kola Peninsula on 1 July 1960, Norwegian Foreign Minister Dr Halvard
Lange met with CIA Director Allen W. Dulles on 6 October 1960, and
demanded that‘information concerning the RB-47 shootdown which had
been obtained from Norwegian sources not be used by the US in the United
Nations debate’. Minister Lange was referring to Norwegian Sigint
intercepts of Soviet air defence communications, which showed that the
American reconnaissance aircraft was flying well outside Soviet airspace at
the time it was attacked by the Russian fighters. Dr Lange’s demand meant
that the US could not publicly use the Norwegian intercepts to prove its case
before the United Nations. Declassified documents in American archives
make clear that Dr Lange knew very little about the nature and extent of
American intelligence gathering activities in and around Norway.47
    We have also seen in the essay on the Netherlands in this study that the
Dutch Cabinet was very reluctant in 1970s in agreeing to intelligence
sharing arrangements with the NSA and BND. Apparently this was
considered as‘ t o o hot to handle’despite the fact that both nations were
trusted and long-time NATO allies.
    The presence of sensitive American Sigint collection facilities in
countries bordering the Soviet Union was a constant source of diplomatic
tension between the US government and the host nations. For example, as
part of a negotiating ploy to obtain more military aid from the US, in March
1961 the Turkish General Staff imposed severe restrictions on
reconnaissance overflights of Turkey, banning any flight from coming
closer than 100 kilometres to the Russian border, or flying higher than
40,0000 feet. These restrictions, for all intents and purposes, killed all US
and British Sigint reconnaissance flights over Turkish airspace, and the
Turks knew it. As detailed in the contribution on GCHQ, when American
and British defence officials came to Ankara to discuss these onerous
restrictions with General Sunay, the Chief of the Turkish General Staff, they
discovered that it was all a ploy designed to extract more money and
equipment from the US for the Turkish military and intelligence service.
    During the 1950s, relations between the US and the Chinese Nationalist
government on Taiwan were severely strained over the question of how
much access the Chinese would have to the materials generated by the
CONCLUSIONS                                                             327
American Sigint sites on their territory. The Chinese demanded that the US
provide them with‘all information obtained through the operation of the
[American Sigint] units on movements and disposition of the Communist
forces and on other related matters of mutual interest to the two
governments’. This provision was unacceptable to the US government, and
the Chinese refused to modify their demand for complete and total access to
the materials being gathered by the American Sigint sites in their country.
For three years the two sides refused to budge, leading to suspicions within
the Chinese government that perhaps the American sites were being used to
spy on them.48 Finally, in June 1959, the US gave the Taiwanese what
amounted to a face-saving solution to the imbroglio: Washington agreed to
pass to the Chinese government‘information vital to the security of the
GRC obtained through the operation of these units’. But the US would not
agree to complete access to the raw intercepts being gathered by the
American sites.49
    The American response to this sort of pressure in some instances was to
immediately lessen dependence on that country. In the case of Turkey,
beginning in the mid-1960s, the US began closing several NSA sites in that
country and transferring their mission elsewhere as a means of lessening US
dependence on Turkey. In this way the US began pressuring the Turkish
government to soften its negotiating demands on access to the American
bases in that country.50
    A seventh thread in this collection is the fact that many European
nations, as well as Canada, are deeply involved in economic espionage
against other nations, including their allies within NATO or the European
Union. This study shows that Sigint is one of the most important methods
used to collect this information.
    On the basis of recently declassified documents it was shown in the
contribution dealing with the Netherlands that Sigint was used to target
financial and economic goals. For example, there was a secret arrangement
with the main Postal and Telegraph office in Amsterdam where all open but
also coded and ciphered telegrams were brought. Here copies were made of
most if not all of the important telegrams and then delivered to the
cryptanalysts of the TIVC. In this manner extremely valuable economic
intelligence was gathered because commercial secrets and other trade
information flowed into the hands of intelligence officials. Very often the
economic traffic (cipher or encoded) by telegram and later telex posed few
problems for the codebreakers. Via intercepts the TIVC collected much
intelligence for Dutch industry. In particular intelligence about foreign
tenders and contracts was of importance to companies and firms. Also
developments in the international tourist industry were monitored via
Sigint. In addition, Sigint on large construction projects like airports,
328     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

harbours, irrigation, etc. was also looked for. Also various Dutch
multinationals like Philips and Shell received this economic intelligence.
Intelligence was also gathered on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture. The
TIVC forwarded information about the agricultural output of various
European countries.51 The TIVC also intercepted German contract
information dealing with the construction of frigates for foreign
governments. This enabled Dutch shipyards for example to present bids,
which were more attractive than the German ones.
    However, the Dutch service was not alone in collecting economic and
financial intelligence with the utilisation of Sigint. For example, the German
services like the BND sometimes also outsmarted the Netherlands by
intercepting Dutch tenders enabling the Germans finally to get the contract.
Thus Germany was manifestly involved in economic espionage. Also
Canadian Sigint was involved in targeting non-security related economic
targets of opportunity as part of Operation‘Aquarian’aimed at foreign
embassies and consulates even those of friendly or indeed allied countries.
As was ascertained in this collection, CSE intercepts were said to have been
instrumental in enabling Canada to out-compete the United States in a US$5
billion wheat sale to China in 1981.
    As was shown in this work, France is also heavily involved in economic
espionage. In 1996, the former head of the DGSE, Claude Silberzahn,
admitted to German reporters that the DGSE not only collected economic
intelligence, but also that this intelligence was passed to French
corporations.52 Exposés in the French press have revealed that the DGSE
and its predecessor organisations have spied on the US since the early
1960s, including conducting economic intelligence collection against
American multinational corporations such as Boeing, IBM, Corning Glass,
and Texas Instruments. Some of these operations were conducted by French
agents in New York City and Washington. But the majority of the
intelligence collected was derived from Sigint intercepts of American
commercial communications. The US, however, was not the only
commercial target of French intelligence. In 1967, the GCR Sigint station at
Mont Valerien outside Paris began intercepting the commercial
communications of major West German corporations. In 1974, the listening
post at Boullay-ces-Trois was tasked with intercepting West German and
British commercial communications.53
    Also GCHQ has been deeply involved in economic espionage since the
end of World War II. It monitored for example from 1945 French diplomatic
traffic, which offered insights into subjects as diverse as French economic
negotiations with the United States and French plans for exploiting the Saar
coal mines in Germany. About later years not much is known yet and more
research has to be done. However, the simple fact that GCHQ is openly
CONCLUSIONS                                                                329
advertising on its website that it is looking for linguists who speak the
languages of the EU is an indication that this Sigint service is still involved
in targeting its allies. At last, as the study on Scandinavia already implied,
countries like Denmark and Sweden are probably also involved in
intercepting economic targets.
    Finally, what about the United States? Former CIA director James
Woolsey vigorously denied that the United States was engaged in industrial
espionage in the sense of collecting or even sorting intelligence that it
collects overseas for the benefit of or to be given to American corporations.
He took this remarkable step in view of the‘tumult’in Europe as regards
the revelations about‘ E c h e l o n ’and economic espionage. Despite this
reassurance the suspicions remain regarding the main targets of NSA in
Europe. This scepticism prompted the German Under-Secretary for
Intelligence Affairs, Ernst Uhrlau, and BND President, August Hanning, to
visit Bad Aibling Station in November 1999. After the visit, Uhrlau stated
that NSA Director General Michael V. Hayden had given him a guarantee
that no German interests were being violated by the station’s intelligence
work. Uhrlau told the German weekly magazine Der Spiegel that Bad
Aibling Station conducted no economic espionage against German firms.
However, according to Der Spiegel, while Uhrlau and Hayden’s statements
in November 1999 were correct, in fact NSA’s economic espionage against
Germany had been transferred to Menwith Hill Station in Britain. The main
economic focus of the Bad Aibling listening post was now Switzerland and
Liechtenstein and in particular banking transactions and money laundering.
    Finally, an eighth thread in this work is probably the most revealing one:
there are no friendly intelligence services. In the world of Sigint all
members of NATO and the EU spy on each other. The Americans and
British took the lead during World War II and never terminated spying on
their European allies. With the establishment of UKUSA a third partner
Canada stepped in this business too. The major services are probably
reading the ciphers and codes of the other and often smaller members on
NATO and the EU. For example, the diplomatic code of the Netherlands
was broken in 1943 but during the 1950s the language schools of NSA and
GCHQ were still teaching Dutch. That GCHQ was openly advertising in the
year 2000 on its website that it is looking for linguists who speak Dutch is
an indication that this Sigint service is still targeting the Netherlands. Also
CSE in Canada is able to read the Dutch traffic.54 It is known at the official
level in the Netherlands that this country ranks very high on the list of
targets of the NSA site at Menwith Hill.
    However, spying via Sigint on friends and allies is also done by the
smaller services. As has been shown in this work, Germany has spied on
other EU members, like France, Italy and the Netherlands. The Netherlands
330      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

was eavesdropping on the diplomatic traffic of NATO allies like France,
Belgium, Italy and Turkey. France and the Scandinavian Sigint
organisations were listening to the traffic of their European allies as well. A
book recently published in France revealed that in 1993 the French
intercepted the radio conversation between an American ambassador aboard
a US Air Force plane and an American military official in Brussels,
Belgium.55
    This work also shatters the myth long cherished in Paris that ‘France was
solely targeted by the Americans’. France is targeted not only by NSA, but
also by its main European allies. This work at the same time also
demolishes the long held myth that only the NSA is‘the principal evil’in
the world of Sigint. It turns out that no targets are safe from the Sigint
services whether they originate from small or large countries.


                                          NOTES

 1. Confidential interview.
 2. Cryptolog, Spring 1996, p.5.
 3. Michael Herman, Intelligence: Power in Peace and War (Cambridge: Cambridge UP 1996)
    p.203.
 4. Memo for the Chief, Air Intelligence Policy Division, Subject: Half Moon, 28 April 1948,
    RG-341, Entry 214, File 2-1400-2-1499, NA, CP.
 5. Memo for Record, 11 May 1951, RG-341, Entry 214, Box 57, File 2-19600– 2-19699, NA,
    CP; Letter to Chief, Supplemental Research Branch, USAF Directorate of Intelligence from
    Major William S. Trites, Exchange of Information Between US Services and Technical Radio
    Investigation Committee (TRIC), 8 Aug. 1951; Memo for Record, 6 Sept. 1951; Letter to Lt.
    Col. William S. Trites, US Air Attaché Office, London, Exchange of Information Between
    US Services and TRIC, 1 Sept. 1951, all in RG-341, Entry 214, Box 59, File 2-20700– 2-
    20799, NA, CP.
 6. CIA Historical Staff, Allen W Dulles as DC1, Vol. II, pp.89–90, RG-263, NA, CP; Philip K.
    Edwards,‘The President’s Board: 1956–60’, Studies in Intelligence (Summer 1969) p.121,
    RG-263, Entry 27, Box 16, NA, CP; O.D. Dickey, The Development of the US ELINT Effort,
    p.4, AIA FOIA; NSA/CSS Manual 22-1, 21 Oct. 1986, p.2, NSA FOIA; Memorandum for
    the Special Assistant, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 9 Dec. 1980, p.l; and Assistant to
    the Secretary of Defense (Special Operations) to Secretary of Defense, 30 July 1958, both
    provided to authors by Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson.
 7. Memo, Agee to Coordinator of Joint Operations, Proposed US-Canadian Agreement, 7 June
    1948, RG-341, Entry 214, Box 40, File 2-1200– 2-1299, NA, CP; John Bryden, Best-Kept
    Secret: Canadian Secret Intelligence in the Secold World War (Toronto: Lester 1993) p.296.
 8. William F. Friedman Catalog, 5 Sept. 1957, RG-457, Yardley Collection, Box 2, Document
    21, NA, CP.
 9. For South Vietnam, see Army Security Agency, When The Tiger Stalks No More: The
    Vietnamization of SIGINT: May 1961– June 1970, p.l, INSCOM FOIA. For Japan, see‘US
    Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.45; FBIS-EAS-96-043,‘Japan:
    Defence Agency Setting up Intelligence Agency’, 4 March 1996.
10. John D. Bergen, Military Communications: A Test for Technology (Washington DC: US
    Army Center for Military History 1986) p.20.
11. Mats R. Berdal, The United States, Norway and the Cold War, 1954–60 (London: Macmillan
    Press 1997) p.39.
12. Memo, Everest to Chief of Staff, Daily Activity Report, dated 26 Jan.1949, RG-341, Entry
CONCLUSIONS                                                                                  331
     214, File 2-6100– 2-6199, NA, CP;‘Lost Plane was Spying for US, Former Official Says’,
     The Associated Press, 26 Sept. 1990.
13. Rad, AFC 444, USAIRA STOCKHOLM SWEDEN SGN WERTHENBAKER to CSAF
     WASH DC, 26 April 1951, RG-319, Entry 58 US Army G-2 Top Secret Incoming/Outgoing
     Cables 1942–1952, Box 172, Sweden, NA, CP.
14. Peter Wright, Spycatcher: The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence Officer (NY:
     Viking 1987) pp.113–14.
15. Ibid. pp. 185–6.
16. Gene Poteat,‘Stealth, Countermeasures, and ELINT, 1960–1975’, Studies in Intelligence,
     pp.53–4, 57–8, via Dr Jeffrey T. Richelson.
17. Ola Tunander,‘The Uneasy Imbrication of Nation-State and NATO: The Case of Sweden’,
     Co-operation and Conflict, June 1999, pp.183, 186.
18. Richard Norton-Taylor,‘GCHQ’s Service to US Crucial’, The Guardian, 17 May 1994, p.8.
19. Hugh Lanning and Richard Norton-Taylor, A Conflict of Interest: GCHQ 1984–1991
     (Cheltenham: New Clarion Press 1991) p.33.
20. Herman, Intelligence (note 3) p.204.
21. Charles Grant, Intimate Relations: Can Britain Play a Leading Role in European Defence –
    and Keep its Special Links to US Intelligence? (London: Centre for European Reform 2000)
     p.3.
22. CM 4897, Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 1999–2000, 2 Nov. 2000,
     located at www.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm48/4897/4897-02.htm.
23. Norton-Taylor,‘GCHQ’s Service to US“Crucial”’(note 18).
24. Confidential interview. For the use of the Racal intercept receiver at NSA intercept sites, see
     Department of the Army, FM 34-40-12, Morse Code Intercept Operations, 26 Aug. 1991,
     pp.4–7, INSCOM FOIA.
25. Naval Intelligence Professionals Quarterly, Spring 1992, p.15.
26. Annual Historical Report, TUSLOG Detachment Four, Fiscal Year 1970, Vol. I, p.19,
     INSCOM FOIA.
27. Confidential interview.
28. Norton-Taylor,‘GCHQ’s Service to US“Crucial”’(note 18).
29. ‘US Electronic Espionage: A Memoir’, Ramparts, Aug. 1972, p.45.
30. XA-1406, Bratislava to Unit 402-A, intercepted 25 Feb. 1949, solved 29 March 1949; XA-
     1407, Bratislava to Unk, intercepted 17 March 1949, solved 4 April 1949; XA-1409,
    Bratislava to Nitra, 17 March 1949; XA-1414, Bratislava to All Stations, 29 March 1949, all
     in RG-38, Box 2744, NA, CP.
31. Disposition Form, CofS to J3, [subject classified], 6 March 1954; Disposition Form, Chief
    of Staff to J3, [subject classified], 16 March 1954; and Disposition Form, CofS to Chiefs of
    Divisions and Separate Branches, [subject classified], 25 March 1954, all in RG-349 Records
    of Far East Command, Entry 71 J-2 Decimal File 1953–1954, Box 2, File: 311, NA, CP.
32. G-2, GHQ Inter-Office Memorandum, J2 (Foreign Military Liaison) to JSigint
     (Communications Branch), Release of JEC Reports to UK, 4 June 1954, RG-349 Records of
    Far East Command, Entry 71 J-2 Decimal File 1953–1954, Box 2, File: 311, NA, CP.
33. Duncan Campbell,‘Over Here and Under Cover’, The Independent, 6 Oct. 1993, p.24;
    House of Commons Hansard Debates, 25 March 1994, Column 612, located at www.
    parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cml99394/cmhansard/1994.../Debate-7.htm.
34. ‘Comint and the PRC Intervention in the Korean War’, Cryptologic Quarterly, date
    unknown, p.6, NSA FOIA.
35. Tom Mangold, Cold Warrior (NY: Simon & Schuster 1991) p.134.
36. Confidential interviews.
37. Grant, Intimate Relations (note 21) p.4.
38. Olav Riste, The Norwegian Intelligence Service, 1945–1970 (London and Portland, OR:
    Frank Cass 1999) p.95.
39. Marian Wilkinson,‘Revealed: Our Spies in Iraq’, Sydney Morning Herald, 28 Jan. 1999, p.l.
40. Letter for USAF Director of Intelligence, Director of Operations and Director of Plans from
    Assistant for Air Bases, DCS/Operations, USAF Requirements Versus NATO Requirements,
    3 Oct. 1951, RG-341, Entry 214, File 2-21100– 2-21199, NA, CP.
332      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

41. Berdal, The United States, Norway and the Cold War (note 11) pp.30–1.
42. Confidential interviews.
43. ‘How Co-operation in Balkans Works’, Intelligence Newsletter, Sigint 385, 29 June 2000.
44. Grant, Intimate Relations (note 21) p.6.
45. Rad, TAP 8945, CHIEF JAMMAT ANKARA TURKEY (SGD ARNOLD) to DEPTAR
    WASH DC FOR G3, 7 Dec. 1951, RG-319, Entry 58 Army G-2 Top Secret Incoming/
    Outgoing Cables 1942–1952, Box 172, File: Turkey, NA, CP.
46. Air Attaché, Copenhagen, Denmark, Air Intelligence Information Report IR-149-54, Danish
    Attitude and Co-operation in Regard to USAFE Special Mission,‘Fluorescent’, 19 Oct.
     1954, RG-341, Entry 267, File 4-4222, NA, CP.
47. Memo, Kohler to The Secretary, Conversation with Norwegian Foreign Minister Lange: U-
    2 and RB-47, 6 Oct. 1960, RG-59, Entry 5182 Records Relating to the RB-47/U-2 Incidents,
    Box 2, File: Top Secret RB-47, NA, CP. Memo, Allen W. Dulles to the Secretary of State and
     Secretary of Defence, Memorandum of Conversation, 7 Oct. 1960; Memo, Foy D. Kohler to
    The Secretary, Conversation with Foreign Minister Lange: U-2 and RB-47, 10 Oct. 1960, all
    in RG-59, Entry 5182 Records Relating to the RB-47/U-2 Incidents, Box 1, File: Memo, NA,
    CP.
48. Msg No. 984, Taipei to Secretary of State, 22 March 1957, RG-59, Entry 5221 Top Secret
    Files Regarding the Republic of China, Box 2, File: Air Force Communications Project –
    Formosa, NA, CP.
49. Memo, Kelly to Jefferson et al., Annex J of Taiwan SOF Agreement, 11 June 1959, with
    attachments, RG-59, Entry 5221 Top Secret Files Regarding the Republic of China, Box 3,
    File: Air Force Communications Project– Formosa, NA, CP.
50. Letter, Howison to Bronez, 8 Dec. 1966, RG-59, Entry 5258 Records of the Country Director
    for Turkey, Box 11, File: DEF 15 Bases, NA, CP.
51. Confidential interview.
52. Imre Karacs,‘France Spied on Commercial Rivals’, The Independent, 11 Jan. 1996, p. 11.
53. Peter Schweizer, Friendly Spies (NY: Atlantic Monthly Press 1993) p.103.
54. Confidential interview.
55. ‘Eavesdropping Between Worst of Friends’, Intelligence Newsletter, No. 352, 2 Nov. 1999.
                              Abstracts




                            Introduction:
        The Importance of Signals Intelligence in the Cold War
                  MATTEW M. AID and CEES WIEBES

This contribution presents a general overview of Signals Intelligence
(Sigint), as well as a balanced assessment of the historical strengths and
weaknesses of Sigint as an intelligence source, with a focus post the Cold
War era. One of the key findings is that Sigint became an essential source
of intelligence information on both sides of the Iron Curtain because of the
failings of other intelligence sources, especially Human Intelligence
(Humint). It is also apparent that Sigint, together with the reconnaissance
satellites operated by the US and the USSR, consistently produced the most
reliable intelligence available to consumers on both sides of the Atlantic.
After weighing Sigint’s successes and failings during the Cold War, the
authors also conclude that Sigint’s true value as an intelligence source can
only be achieved when it is effectively combined with information produced
by other intelligence sources into an‘all-source’product.


           The National Security Agency and the Cold War
                            MATTHEW M. AID

This study focuses on NSA’s 39-year intelligence collection effort against
the former Soviet Union during the Cold War. All available evidence
indicates that NSA’s Sigint product was an essential means by which the US
intelligence community was kept apprised of what was going on inside the
Soviet Union, despite the fact that NSA was oftentimes unable to solve
Russia’s most important encryption systems The ability to adapt and apply
334     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

its superior technological wherewithal to overcome obstacles was a
hallmark of NSA’s Cold War efforts. When it could not crack the Soviet
Union’s most important encryption systems, NSA appears to have gone
around the problem and exploited less important systems that proved to be
important sources of intelligence information. NSA also worked closely
with other branches of the US intelligence community, such as its work with
the CIA and the FBI to obtain foreign cryptologic materials by clandestine
means, its joint effort with the National Reconnaissance Office to field
Sigint satellites, and its close collaboration with the US Navy to tap
undersea communications cables.


           GCHQ and Sigint in the Early Cold War 1945–70
                           R I C H A R D J. ALDRICH

GCHQ is without question the least discussed of Britain’s Cold War
intelligence services. Yet by most indicators– including budget, numbers of
staff, or intelligence output– it was the most important. This essay argues
that this reflects not only a greater anxiety on the part of GCHQ to maintain
secrecy, but also a disinterest among historians in more technical matters. It
reviews some of the limited material available in recently released files
relating to GCHQ for the period up to 1970, noting its particular importance
in the areas of military intelligence and nuclear targeting. The particular
security problems presented by large-scale cryptographic operations are
also discussed.


        Canada’s Communications Security Establishment from
                    Cold War to Globalization
                             MARTIN RUDNER

The Communications Security Establishment (CSE) is Canada’s largest and
costliest intelligence organization and the main provider of foreign
intelligence to the Canadian government. CSE collects, analyses and reports
on signals intelligence (Sigint), and participates in the UKUSA alliance
with the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand and
other third parties. During the Cold War Canada’s Sigint effort was directed
primarily at the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies, but also served
other foreign policy objectives as well. After the Cold War ended, and in
response to the changing threat environment, the Canadian Cabinet issued a
policy directive that promulgated new priorities for foreign intelligence,
notably international terrorism, ethnic and religious conflict, proliferation of
ABSTRACTS                                                                 335
weapons of mass destruction, illegal migration, transnational organized
crime, economic (counter-)espionage, and trade intelligence. This essay
traces the historical evolution of CSE in performing its signals intelligence
functions from the Cold War through to today’s more diversified and
globalized security agenda, utilizing the international liaison arrangements
and technological capabilities at its disposal.


   The Bundesnachrichtendienst, the Bundeswehr and Sigint in the
                       Cold War and After
                       ERICH S C H M I D T - E E N B O O M

The contribution shows the development of German Sigint after World War
II beginning in 1946, when the Organisation Gehlen under the patronage of
the CIA performed the first operations, and ending in the late 1990s when
the system of Cold War listening stations was restructured. Based on a lot
of top secret documents all stations, their tasks and many hidden operations
are revealed. Another main focus lies on German foreign relations in the
field of Sigint, i.e. joint ventures with NATO partners in and outside
Germany and cooperation with countries reaching from South Africa to
both Chinas. The radio transmission system for agents, the BND centre for
coding and decoding, and the legal foundations are also described in detail.


                     France, Sigint and the Cold War
                              ROGER FALIGOT

When the Cold War began in 1947, France used a widespread signal
intelligence network set up in the 1930s, mostly in Africa and Asia. The
postwar reorganization of the French intelligence services (SDECE, DST,
GCR and others) saw former resistance fighters and ex-military and
policemen who had served under the Vichy government joined in the
common cause to defeat Communism. They were involved in the
decolonization wars, in Indochina and Algeria as well as the communication
war in Eastern Europe. The diversity of battlefields involved a smaller
French Sigint community that linked up with the predominant Anglo-Saxon
system. At the same time, they opposed some of the US operations.
Following the Gulf War, France devoted more financial means and human
power to developing an independent satellite intercept system. It covers new
local conflicts in Central Europe and the economic intelligence war. French
strategists believe this is a first step towards a united European intelligence
system.
336     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

                  Scandinavia, Sigint and the Cold War
                             ALF R. JACOBSEN

All four Scandinavian countries (Norway, Denmark, Sweden and Finland)
were deeply engaged in signals intelligence collection against the Soviet
Union throughout the Cold War, albeit in great secrecy. Norway and
Denmark, both of whom were members of NATO, worked closely with their
American and British Sigint counterparts in monitoring military and civilian
radio traffic coming from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. But the
Norwegian and Danish Sigint services retained a high degree of
independence because the American and British Sigint organizations were
barred from operating on their soil. But both nations were heavily
dependent on the US for financial and technical assistance throughout the
Cold War. Neutral Sweden and Finland also devoted the vast majority of
their Sigint resources to monitoring the military activities of the Soviet
Union, although very little is publicly known about the activities of the
Finnish Sigint organization. Available evidence suggests that Sweden,
despite its neutrality, maintained a substantial clandestine Sigint sharing
relationship with the US and Great Britain, particularly during the early
stages of the Cold War.


               Dutch Sigint during the Cold War, 1945–94
                               CEES WIEBES

Not much is known about the Netherlands Signals Intelligence (Sigint)
activities, which were executed by the Technisch Informatie Verwerkings
Centrum (TIVC). During the Cold War the Sigint effort was not so much
directed at the Soviet Union and its allies but primarily against European
nations. It also served other foreign policy objectives. Sigint was used in the
Dutch colonial struggle with Indonesia over the control of the island of New
Guinea but also in Latin America. After the demise of the Soviet Union new
priorities were formulated like international terrorism, ethnic and religious
conflict, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, illegal migration,
transnational organized crime, etc. This essay traces the historical evolution
of the TIVC in performing its Sigint functions during the Cold War.
ABSTRACTS                                                                 337

         Dutch Sigint and the Conflict with Indonesia 1950–62
                               WIES PLATJE

The outbreak of the First World War speeded up the development of
cryptology and signals intelligence in the Netherlands. Amid belligerent
European neighbors not only neutrality had to be safeguarded but the
Netherlands also had to maintain its position in the overseas colonies. Later,
when Japan prepared for war a remarkable capability was set up to intercept
Japanese communications and to break Japanese codes. This capability
became very fruitful during the military campaigns against Indonesian
nationalist troops after the Second Word War. During the New Guinea
conflict in 1962, Netherlands Sigint operations against Indonesia played a
very important and crucial role.


                                Conclusions
                 MATTHEW M. AID and CEES WIEBES

In this final contribution a synopsis of the various essays is given and an
overview is provided about what important contributions were made to the
security of the United States, Canada and several nations of Western Europe
by Sigint. In view of the purpose of this study, to broaden in a profound way
the public’s knowledge about the role of Sigint in countries outside the
United States, what lessons can be learned from this collection? The
question will also be answered if it is worthwhile to follow an enhanced
multinational and more comparative approach regarding intelligence history
in the future. Has there been too much‘intelligence history snobbery’in the
past? Is it possible to construct a new approach regarding intelligence
history? Should serious academic historical studies dealing with all aspects
of intelligence be far more‘internationalist’in approach? They should take
into account the accomplishments of the world’s smaller services, from
whom the world’s larger intelligence organisations derived much of their
information during the Cold War.
                  About the Contributors




Matthew M. Aid, a native of New York City, served as a Russian linguist
and intelligence analyst with the US Department of Defense, then as a
senior manager with two international financial research and investigative
companies for 13 years. He is presently an Associate Managing Director in
the Washington DC office of Kroll Associates. He is currently completing a
history of the National Security Agency and its predecessor organisations.
He is also the author of a chapter about the National Security Agency in a
book published by the University of Kansas Press in 1998 entitled A Culture
of Secrecy: The Government Versus the People’s Right to Know.

Richard J. Aldrich is currently Professor of Politics at the University of
Nottingham, United Kingdom. In addition he is Director of the Institute of
Asia-Pacific Studies, University of Nottingham and Co-editor of the journal
Intelligence and National Security. His recent publications include
Intelligence and the War Against Japan: Britain America and the Politics of
Secret Service which was published in 2000 by Cambridge University Press.
His current study The Hidden Hand: Britain, America and Cold War Secret
Intelligence will be published by John Murray in July 2001.

Roger Faligot is a French journalist specialising in intelligence and security
matters. He is a former correspondent for The European and he is the co-
author of the book La Piscine: The French Secret Service Since 1944 (1985)
and DST, Police Secrète (1999). He is also the author of several books on
the Far East: The Chinese Secret Service (1989) and Naisho: Investigating
the Japanese Secret Service (1998). His most recent publication deals with
The Chinese Mafia in Europe (2000).
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS                                                  339
Alf R. Jacobsen is the editor-in-chief of current affairs documentaries at
NRK, the Norwegian Public Broadcasting Corporation. Before he entered
television he was an investigative journalist with the biggest daily
newspaper of Norway. He has published more than 20 books and written
screenplays for several feature films. Among his books are The Prize of
Suspicion, Ice Kiss and The Moles about the history of the Norwegian
Intelligence Services. Jacobsen has won various prizes for his work. He was
elected Investigative Journalist for the year 1991, and he co-produced with
Anglia TV the documentary Secrets of the Gaul, which won the Royal TV
Society Award for best current affairs documentary in Britain in 1998.

Wies Platje, born in 1940 in Eindhoven, is Lieutenant Commander retired
Royal Netherlands Navy. From 1961 until 1994, he held various functions
within the Netherlands Navy Intelligence Service. He was a junior
intelligence analyst in the former Netherlands New Guinea; intelligence
analyst Warsaw Pact naval forces and intelligence officer to the group of
maritime patrol aircraft at Valkenburg naval airbase. He also served as
intelligence officer in the staff of the Commander-in-Chief Eastern Atlantic
Area at Northwood, UK and Head of the acquisition and distribution section
of the Military Intelligence Service/Navy. He is the author of a book about
the Netherlands Navy Intelligence Service, published in 1997. He is since
1998 also a member of the NISA board.

Martin Rudner is Professor of International Affairs and Director of the
Centre for Security and Defence Studies at the Norman Paterson School of
International Affairs, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada. He teaches a
graduate course on Intelligence, Statecraft and International Affairs in the
school. In September 2000 he was elected President of the Canadian
Association for Security and Intelligence Studies (CASIS).

Erich Schmidt-Eenboom was born in 1953. In 1973 he joined the
Bundeswehr and in the officers’training course studied Sociology and
History at the Bundeswehr University in Hamburg. After 12 years of service
he left the German Army in 1985 and began to work for the
Forschungsinstitut für Friedenspolitik. He published various articles and
books dealing with the strategy, infrastructure and troop force composition
in NATO. Since May 1990 he has been Director of the Institute and
concentrated his work on intelligence and security services in Europe, Japan
and North America. He has published two books dealing with the
Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND).
340     SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Cees Wiebes (born in 1950) began to study Political Science at the
University of Amsterdam in 1973. In 1983 he received his Doctoral degree
(cum laude) with as specialisation: international diplomatic relations,
contemporary history and international public law. In 1993 he defended his
PhD at the University of Leiden. Thesis title:‘Belgium, The Netherlands
and Alliances, 1940–1949’. Since 1983 he has been a Senior Lecturer at the
Department of International Relations and International Public Law at the
University of Amsterdam. Since 1 January 1999 he has been on loan to the
Srebrenica research project of the Netherlands Institute for War
Documentation. His latest publication was with Bob de Graaff entitled: Villa
Maarheeze: The History of the Dutch Foreign Intelligence Service,
1946–1994, published in 1998.
                                          Index

Note: Page numbers in italic indicate illustrations.




'Able Archer 83' exercise 50                           77
ABM 44, 47                                         TAREX 44
Achille Lauro crisis 50                            Arnaud, Col. Paul 179, 183, 190
Adventure border intercept site 8                  ASTRAB 194-5
Afghanistan 157, 158                               atomic bomb, Soviet 82-3
     invasion 47, 195                              Australia 103, 108, 109, 118, 298
Afghanistan War 9, 51                                  Sigint 13-14, 76
Ahmed, Hocine Ait 191                                  UKUSA314, 315
Aid, Matthew 1,27,77,311                           Austria 316
air force, Soviet 209                              AVI 281
air forces, Elint 80-3                             AWACS aircraft 198
aircraft                                           Ayios Nikolaos 74
     Elint 234-5
     Sigint collection 198                         Baader-Meinhof Group 164
airfields, radio traffic 3                         ballistic missile submarines 45, 47
Albania 155                                        ballistic missiles, testing 4
Aldrich, Richard 67, 315, 320                      Barbieri, Maj. 72-3
Algeria 181-2, 198-9                               Bastiaans, J.F. 292
Algerian Islamic Salvation Front 155               Baun, Herman 166
Algerian War 189-92                                Bazéries, Etienne 178
Allemand, Jean 191                                 Belgium 277
Allen, Richard V. 53                               Belleux, Col. Maurice 188
'Alliance' network 179                             Ben Barka, Mehdi 192
Ames, Aldrich H. 52                                Ben Bella, Ahmed 189, 191
Amethyste submarine 203                            Benoît, Col. André, 193
Amin, Idi 155                                      Berliat, Paul 186
ANBw 140-1, 143-4, 148, 168-9, 171                 Berlin Tunnel, cable tapping 41
Anderson, HMS 75, 77-8                             Berlin Wall, fall 199
Andrew, Christopher 1                              Berry spy ship 198-9, 201, 202-3
Angleton, James 248                                Bertrand, Cmndt Gustave 179, 180, 182,
antenna array, AN/FRD-10 48                             183-4
antenna systems                                    Best, Werner 216-17
     German 144-6                                  Beurling, Arne 214
     Granger 256                                   BfY132
antenna towers, Wobeck, West Germany 49            Biesheuvel, Barend 265
Apel, Hans 140                                     Bistos, François 190
Arab-Israeli War (1967) 43                         Black Chamber 212, 213, 215, 221
Argentina 161, 275-6                               'Black Friday' 18,35,37
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA)                Black, Lt. Col. 184
      19-20, 32, 35, 36                            Blake, George 19, 92
army, Soviet Union 209                             Blanc, Georges 194
Army Security Agency 16, 18, 32, 34, 35, 76,       Bletchley Park 67, 69, 71-2
342       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Blötz, Dieter 136-8, 139, 140, 144-6, 147,     Canaris, Adm. Wilhelm 217
     151, 159, 160, 163                        CANUKAS 109
BND 20, 183, 204, 260, 275, 279, 320           CANUSA 108, 315-16
     anti-criminal activities 164-5            Canyon satellite 46
     cooperation with Netherlands 265-6,       Castagne, Col. Maurice 201
     324, 326                                  Castro, Fidel 310
     cooperation with other agencies 138^-0,   Castro, Raul 10
      154-9                                    Cavendish, Anthony 31
     cryptanalysis 159-62                      CBNRC76,99, 102,318
     early years 130-3                         Celebes 300, 301
     economic intelligence 328                 Central Signals Establishment 75
     modernization 135-40                      CER 186
     relations with Bundeswehr 135, 137-40,    CERM 198-9, 201
      141-7, 166-71                            Ceylon 77-8
     satellite reconnaissance 150-3            CGT 194
Bodin, Col. 184                                Chad 197, 325
Boetzel, Friedrich 131-2                       Chalet, Marcel 193
Boouterse, Desi 280                            Chalet satellite 46
Bosnia 323                                     Chechnya 157-8
Boudiaf, Muhammed 191                          Chernobyl disaster 51
Bougainville spy ship 203                      Chiles, Griffin 225-6
Bourgogne, Col. Paul 198                       China 5, 39, 115, 157, 158
Brandt, Willy 135, 146                         Chinese Civil War 14
Bratt, Peter 224                               Chinese Communist Party 178
Bridges, Sir Edward 75, 83                     Chopin de Janvry, Col. 194
British Guyana 262-3                           Christmas-Moller, Wilhelm 217-18, 229
Brook, Sir Norman 83                           Churchill, Winston S. 70
Brothers to the Rescue 7                       CIA 5, 6, 7, 9, 17, 19-20, 27, 78, 89, 145,
Brouwer, LtCdrL. 291                                148, 157, 158, 182, 193, 204, 223, 225,
Brownell, George 36-7, 79                           229, 248, 251-2, 262, 274-5, 315, 317,
BRUSA 101, 314, 315                                 329
Brynildsen, Lt. Jon Krag 221                   Division D 41
bugging 87-8, 158,163-4                        operations against Soviet Union 30, 38, 40,
Bundeswehr                                          42,52
     relations with BND 135, 137^0, 141-7,     reconnaisance satellites 42, 46
     166-71                                    Ciliax, Adm. Otto 222
     Sigint 133-5, 137-8, 321, 324             cipher machines
Bunker, Ellsworth 308                               Scandinavian 212-13
Burchardt, Robert 135-6                             stealing 41
Burrough, Dr John 78                           cipher systems
Burrough, John 147                                  Cuba 261
Bush, President George W. 53                        Japanese 288-90
BVD 245, 253, 261, 263, 265, 266, 278               Soviet 33-5, 37, 41, 43-1, 99-100
     liaison with Americans 251-2              ciphers, high-grade 87
                                               civilian personnel, security organizations
C-130 7                                             89-90
Cabell, Gen. Charles 77, 80                    Clarke, William F. 70-1
cable tapping, Berlin Tunnel 41                'Classic Bullseye' surveillance system 45
Caillaud, Col. 192                             'Cod Hook'231, 237
Canada                                         Cold War
    economic intelligence 328                       Canadian operations 105-8
     Sigint 11, 20-1, 76-7, 99-103, 103-8,          early 31-5
     114-18,318                                Collin, Bernard 194
    UKUSA103, 314, 315                         Combined Cipher Machine 79
Canadian Forces Information Operations         Comint 2-3, 12, 14, 19-20, 27
    Group 107-8                                     BND 161-2
INDEX                                                                                  343
     decline in importance 46                      76
    Finland 230                                Curaçao 261-2, 310-11
     France 178                                Cyprus 78
     Indochina 187-8, 189                      Czechoslovakia 137, 140, 301
    Norway 226                                     crisis 1968 17
     Scandinavia 233                               Soviet invasion 43, 265
     Soviet 88
     Sweden 223                                Damm, Arvid and Ivar 212-13
    US agencies 32, 35-6, 77, 78-9             Darul Islam 300
    US/Norwegian cooperation 226-7             data protection 164
Comintern, intelligence service 178            de Gaulle, Gen. Charles 180, 181, 183, 191
Commonwealth Sigint Organization 108           de Silva, Pierre 31
communications cables, tapping 52              Dean, Patrick 83
communications technology, export 154-5        Defence Intelligence Staff, Norway 211,
communications traffic, access to 18               221-2
communism, influence 89                        Defence Radio Institute 213
computer systems                               Defence Signals Directorate, Australia
     DGSE 2 0 3 ^                                   13-14,76,103, 118
     Sigint 111-12, 138,255-6                  Defense Intelligence Agency 7, 9, 17, 27
Comsec 32, 79, 87-92, 121                      den Uyl, Joop 243, 265, 271, 273
Concordia programme 137, 138                   Denmark 139, 161,209,225
Cook, Robin 11                                     Naval Radio Service 217-19
Coote, Cdr John 84                                 occupation 216-17
countermeasures, electronic 3-4                     Sigint 228-9, 233, 237, 316, 320, 324,
Cousseran, Jean-Claude 200                          324-5
Crabb, Cdr Lionel 'Buster' 83                  'Desert Storm', Operation 201
Cram, Cleveland 261                            Dessille, Edmond 194
Crankshaw, Edward 69                           Deutch, John 204
Cray supercomputers 111, 112, 203              'Dew Worm', Operation 105
Cremet, Jean 178                               Dewavrin, André, 180, 182, 183
CRIM 114                                       DGA 203
crime, transnational 116-17, 123, 164-5        DGER 182
CRITICOMM 7                                    DGSE 148, 169, 196-7, 198
cruise missiles 209, 231, 232                       economic intelligence 199-200, 328
cryptanalysis 68, 107, 122                          spying on USA 199-200
     BND 159-62                                Dictionary computers 112
     CSE 104-5, 111                            Dien Bien Phu 188
     France 177-8, 187                         DND, Canada 97
     Netherlands 288-90                        Douglas-Home, Sir Alec 88
     Norway 226                                Drake, Lt. Col. Ed 76
     TIVC 257-8                                DRM 169, 201-2, 203
cryptographic systems, Soviet 41, 4 3 ^ , 46   'Drouot' 180
Cryptological Bureau, Netherlands 287          drug trafficking 117
CSA 32, 34                                     DSD 76
CSE 11, 97-9, 103-8, 111, 113, 114             DST 179, 186, 190, 191, 192-3, 195, 197
     economic intelligence 118-21              Dulles, Allen W 10, 326
     future prospects 121^4                    Dulles, John Foster 298
     HQ buildings 98                           Dur, Adm. Philip 201
     performance 120-1                         Dutch Air Force 254
     post-Cold War priorities 114-18           Dutch Army 254, 259-60
CSIS 116,117,118-19                            Dutch Navy 247, 259-60, 295-7, 299-300
CST 178-9
Cuba 310                                       early warning radar 44, 47
Cuban Missile Crisis 7-9, 10, 42, 43, 134,     East Germany 15, 136, 137, 140, 143, 260
     260-1                                          communications traffic 44, 194-5
Cunningham, Adm. of the Fleet Sir Andrew            Sigint 10-11
344       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     Soviet bases 3                            Frontal Aviation 38
East Timor 13-14
eavesdropping, electronic 163^-, 165           G-2, Germany 72
EC-1217                                        'Gabriel' spyplane 198, 201
'Echelon' system 111-14, 204, 262, 278,        Gates, Robert M. 50
     280, 329                                  Gaudefroy 180
economic intelligence 118-21, 122-3, 150       GCHQ 6, 11, 13, 33, 34, 43, 44, 45, 46,
     DGSE 199-200, 328                             67-8, 103, 109, 147, 161, 194, 195, 224,
     TIVC 278-9, 327-8                             225, 257, 258-9, 261-2, 317, 322
Eden, Anthony 83-4                                 Comsec 88-9
Egypt 190, 191, 271                                economic intelligence 328-9
Ehmke, Horst 137, 144                              Elint 80-3
Einthoven, Louis 251-2                             Falklands War 275-6
Eisenhower, President Dwight D. 31, 36, 298        post-World War II planning 68-71
Electrical Trade Union (ETU) 89-90                 security 90-2
Elie, Gen. Bruno 202                               Sigint cooperation 75-80, 108-9, 315,
Elint2, 3-4, 27, 37-8, 70, 321                     317-20
     aircraft 234-5                                Soviet targets 73—4-
     Anglo-American cooperation 80-3, 315      GCR 179-80, 184-5, 188, 191, 328
     Scandinavia 220-1                             merged into SDECE 193-5
     Sweden 222, 223                           GCSB, New Zealand 100-1, 113
Elkins, Adm. Robert 84                         Geheimschreiber 222
Enigma cipher machine 100                      Gehlen, Maj. Gen. Reinhard 130, 132, 135,
'Epervier', Operation 197                          161, 166, 183, 320
Escobar, Pablo 19, 20                          German Air Force, Sigint 134, 143, 147
Etienne, Capt. Gérard 203                      German Navy, Sigint 134, 139, 147
Evang, Col. Vilhelm 220, 221, 226-7            Germany, GCHQ exploitation of Sigint
                                                   materials 71-2
Faligot, Roger 177, 321, 324                   GIC 192
Falklands War 161, 275-6, 324                  Giraud, Gen. Henri 181
'Farrah' satellite 46-7                        Giscard d'Estaing, President Valéry 195, 196,
Farwick, Gen. Dieter 143                           197
FBI 39, 41,47, 186,315                         Glazebrook, George 76
FCR 219                                        Globke, Hans 166
'Ferret' aircraft 80, 81, 85-6, 223-4, 324-5   Golitsin, Anatoly 193
'Ferret' satellites 44                         Gout, Lt Cdr Ruud 295
Ferris, John 53                                Gouzenko, Igor 99-100
FET 324-5                                      Government Code and Cipher School 67-8,
Finland 209                                        100-1, 180
     Sigint 213-16, 229-30                     Graham, Lt. Gen. Daniel O. 7
Finnish Air Force 230                          'Granger' antenna 256
Fisint 27                                      Greece 323
Fleury, Col. Jean 180, 182                     'Green Door' syndrome 16
FLN 190-1                                      Greenland 218
Fluorescent flights 228, 324-5                 Greenpeace 196
FOA 222, 223                                   'Grosbeak', Operation 5
foreign policy, impact of Sigint 7             Grossier, Gen. Hubertus 136
FRA 213, 216, 222-5, 226, 233, 277, 317        GRU 13, 20, 178, 225, 252
France 106, 161, 169                           Gudgeon, USS 39
     diplomatic traffic 259                    Guillou, Jan 224
     electronic warfare assets 197-9           Gulf War (1991) 200-1, 231, 279-80
     post-Cold War intelligence 199-205        Güllich, Adm. Gerhard 138
     satellite reconnaisance 151-2             Gyldén, Otto 212
     Sigint 148, 177-9, 183-96, 316, 321,      Gyldén, Yves 212
     322, 3 2 3 ^
French Air force 187-8                         Hagelin, Boris 213, 220, 248
INDEX                                                                                 345
Hagelin cipher system 220, 248, 250-1, 257    Isard spy ship 203
Halibut, USS 52                               Israel 159, 170, 265, 271
Hallamaa, Reino 213-14, 216, 229              Italy 161,278, 319, 323
Hanning, August 150, 158, 329                      GCHQ exploitation of Sigint materials
Hauptverwaltung III 10-11                          72-3
Hayden, Gen. Michael V. 150, 329              'Ivy Bells', Operation 52
Heinrich, Gen. Jean 169, 201, 202
Helfrich, Vice Adm. C.E.L. 290, 291           Jacobsen, AlfR. 209, 318
Helios satellite 202, 204                     jamming, radio signals 3-4
'Hen House' radar system 44, 317              Japan 170
Heusinger, Lt. Gen. Adolf 130-1                    Dutch monitoring of naval traffic 287-91
HF radio networks 101, 105-6, 187                  satellite reconnaisance 151
HFDF systems 45                                    Sigint 69-70
Hidajat, Gen. 304                             JNICO 218
Hinsley, Sir Harry 69                         Joint Intelligence Committee 67, 71, 73-4,
'Hippodrome' space collection facility 8           86
Hizbul Mujahideen 18                          Joint Intelligence Committee, Canada 76
Ho Chi Minn 14, 186, 189                      Jones, Eric 75
Hong Kong 75, 78                              Joubert des Ouches, Col. Jean 181
Horton, Philip Clark 182                      Joxe, Pierre 201
Humint 2, 5-6, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 46, 260,     'Jumpseat' satellite 46
    325
    downgrading 16                            KAL007 7, 51
    Indonesia 257-8                           Kalmus, Andres 214, 216
    operations against Soviet Union 29-31,    Karel Doorman Dutch aircraft carrier 299
    42                                        Kashmir 18
    risks 5                                   Keller, Bayard 147
    West Germany 130, 320-1                   Kennan, George 88
Hungary 155                                   Kennedy, President John F. 299, 308
    uprising 1956 40, 255                     Kepsu, Col. Keijo 230
Hüttenhain, Erich 72, 160                     KGB 6, 9, 13, 18, 20, 50, 192, 252, 323
                                                   security and counter-intelligence 30,
IB 224-5, 249                                      100, 105
ICBM 50, 51                                   Khrushchev, Nikita 86
IDB 247, 253, 258, 263, 266, 279, 280         Kimche, David 159
Imbot, Gen. René 196                          Kissinger, Henry 19
India 15-16, 17, 115                          Kistiakowsky, George 31
Indochina 14, 316, 325                        Kluiters, Frans 252
Indonesia 13-14, 155, 264, 323                Kohl, Helmut 138, 152, 204
     arms supplies 301, 303, 309-10           Kola Peninsula 209-10, 316
     claims on New Guinea 297-302             'Kolchose' programme 137
     conflict 254, 256-8, 292-5, 302-8, 325   Komsomolets Soviet submarine 232
     independence 250                         Koot, Maj. Gen. Henri 286-7, 289
     planned amphibious assault on New        Korean War 10, 12, 14, 35, 36, 81
     Guinea 305-8                             Kornblum, John C. 153
industrial espionage 150                      Kosovo 134,153, 169, 323
information technology security 120           Kruimink, Vice Adm. F.E. 301-2
Inglis, Rear-Adm. John 84                     Kullback, Solomon 28
Inman, Adm. Bobby 27-8, 235, 317              Kuntze, Heinz 160
intelligence history, new approach 313-14     Kuwait, invasion 200-1, 279
Intelstat 110-11
international terrorism, Canadian security    Labadie, Col. Maurice 188
     concern 115-16, 117                      Labat, Col. Paul 179, 180
Iran 115, 155, 276                            Labrosse, Col. 192
Iran-Contra affair 19                         Laccariere, Michel 200
Iraq 115, 198, 200-1, 273, 279-80             Lacoste, Adm. Pierre 196
346      SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

Lange, Halvard 326                              Middle East War (1973) 17
Latin America, Sigint operations 260-3          military bases, radio traffic 3
LAUS operation 137                              military intelligence, Netherlands 286-7
Le Pivain, Capt. Jean 198                       Miller, Gen. Yevgeniy 178
Lecoeur, Auguste 186                            Millis, John 7
Lecot, Capt. 180                                missile testing, Soviet Union 231
Lehtonen, Major Lasse 230                       Mitchell, Bernon F. 18,92
Leiberich, Otto 162                             Mitterrand, President François 196-7, 325
LeMay, Gen. Curtis 80                           MNA 190
Liberty, USS 5                                  Monge missile ship 203
Libya 115, 155, 159, 197                        'MORE' project 274
London Communications Security Agency           Mork, Paul Adam 217-19, 229
     89                                         Morocco 191
London Signals Intelligence Board 67            Mossad 159, 225, 271, 275
Lossberg, Gen. Bernhard von 221-2               Mozambique 155
Lubbers, Ruud 280                               Murmansk 84-5
Lunding, Col. Hans 217, 219, 228-9              Muslim nationalists 181
Lundquist, Âke 214
Luns, Joseph 258, 259                           NACSI 276
Lyalin, Oleg 42                                 NAFTA 119
                                                Nasution, Gen. 301
MacArthur, Gen. Douglas 291                     National Elint Program 38
Macmillan, Harold 85, 86                        National Reconnaisance Office 42
'Magic' 17, 100                                 National Security Agency 2, 5, 6, 7, 27-8,
Maihofer, Werner 164                                78-9, 92, 109, 158, 194, 225, 226, 236,
Maistre, Albéric de 180                             257
Malinovsky, Marshal Rodion 86                       1950s 35-41
Männchen, Maj. Gen. Horst 11                        1960s 41-5
Mao Tse-tung 14                                     1970s 45-7
Marcy, Oliver M. 248-9                              1980s 47-53
Marenches, Count Alexandre de 193-5                 cooperation with Netherlands 265-6,
Marid6 291,294-5,310                                275, 326
    Biak New Guinea 297                             cooperation with West Germany 144-50
    Hollandia New Guinea 296                        computer systems 112-14
Marid 6 NNG 295-7, 302-4, 307                       relationship with CSE 103, 106-7
Marjata spy ship 236                                relationship with GCHQ 33-5, 315,
Marr-Johnston, Col. 81                              317-18
Marsch, Günther 163-4                               Scandinavia Sigint 225, 226, 236
Martin, Command Sgt. Maj. John 13                   Soviet target 29-31
Martin, William H. 18,92                            speedy delivery of Sigint 7-9
McConnell, Vice Adm. J.M. 'Mike' 28, 53         National Technical Processing Center 38
McNamara, Barbara 275                               restrictions on information 321-3
Medellin Cartel 19                              NATO 79, 109, 147, 252, 260, 276, 323
Meir, Golda271                                  Naval Communications Intelligence
Melnik, Constantin 191, 192                         Organization 32
Menzies, Maj.-Gen. Sir Stewart 70               Naval Intelligence Division, UK 38
merchant marine, Soviet, communications         Naval Radio Service, Denmark 217-19
    traffic 43                                  Navy
Mermet, Gen. François 197, 200                      joint UK-US Sigint operations 84-5
MI5 41, 192                                         Soviet Union 38-9, 46, 210
MI6 5, 19, 30-1, 41, 179, 225, 229, 275, 276,   Nefis 291, 291-3
    300                                         Nefis8 293,294
operations against Soviet Union 42              Netherlands
MID 245, 280-1                                      Sigint 20, 244-51, 254-6, 316-17, 321,
    HQ 246                                          322-3
Middle East 264-5, 271-2                            Sigint cooperation 258-60, 319, 326
INDEX                                                                                    347
    Sigint materials 6-7                       Paasonen, Col. Aladar 216, 229
    World War I 286-7                          Page, Gen. Karl Heinz 145
Netherlands Antilles 261, 264                  Pakistan 15-16
    Sigint activities 310-11                   Pale, Erkki 214, 216
Netherlands-Indies                             Palestinian Liberation Organisation 271
    Japanese occupation 291                    Palme, Olof 235-6
    Sigint 287-90                              Pan Hannian 178
New Guinea 254, 257, 262, 264, 292, 295-7,     Panier 180
    323                                        Paschke, Adolf 160
    diplomatic conflict 297-9                  'Passy' 180, 182, 183
    Indonesian operations against 302-8        PCR 197
    planned amphibious assault 305-8           Pearl Harbor 290-1
New Zealand 103, 109                           Pelton, Ronald W. 52
    UKUSA314, 315                              Pendred, Air Vice-Marshal Lawrence 80
Ngo Dinh Diem 189                              Penkovskiy, Col. Oleg 6, 14, 42
Nixon, President Richard M. 18-19              People's Liberation Army, China 14
NKVD 178                                       Permesta 300, 301
Noemia computer system 203                     Perry, William J. 53
Nolte, Bill 323                                personal messages, clandestine
non-proliferation 117-18                            communications 180-1, 195
Nordentoft, Lt. Col. Einar 216, 217            Petersen, Joseph 247-9, 250
North Korea 5, 39                              Philby, Kim 68
North Vietnam 12-13                            phone-tapping 163-5, 192
NORUSAII231                                    Photint 12
Norway 77, 209                                 'Pilgrim', Operation 106-7
    Defence Intelligence Service 30            Platje, Wies 250, 258, 285, 325
    Defence Intelligence Staff 221-2, 225-7,   Poland 50, 276, 301
    238                                             Danish intelligence target 229
    Elint 230-1                                Polisario guerrillas 196
    German occupation 215                      Politburo, Soviet 13
    intelligence data 211                      political intelligence 137
    Sigint 212, 219-22, 225-7, 237, 316,       Pompidou, President Georges 192, 196
    320, 322, 323, 324, 326                    Porzner, Konrad 143, 167
    SOSUS 231-2                                positive vetting, GCHQ 90-2
Norwegian Security Service 227-8               Poulden, Cdr Teddy 76
Nuboer, Lt Cdr J.F.W. 288-9                    Powers, Gary 85
nuclear testing 15-16, 231                     'Prawn', Operation 292
nuclear weapons, proliferation 117-18          Prime, Geoffrey 46, 91, 92
                                               Proforma 4
objectivity, Sigint 5-6                        Profumo Scandal 68
O'Donnell, Justin 248, 251                     PRRI 300, 301
Office of Naval Intelligence, USA 38, 274-5,   PTT, Netherlands 253, 265, 266, 269
     319                                       Pueblo, USS 7
oil companies, monitoring communicatoions      Purnell, Capt. William R. 290
     272                                       Putin, President Vladimir 157-8
oil crisis (1973) 271-3                        PVO 37-8, 51-2
Okinawa 78                                     Quebec, separatism 106, 115, 238
Olshausen, Gen. 143-4
O'Neill, Lt. Stasia 182                        radar, early warning 44
OP-20-G 32                                     radar systems, monitoring 3-4, 38, 44, 47,
Ordzhonikidze, Soviet cruiser 83, 225              230-1
Organisation Gehlen 30, 72, 130-3, 155, 159    radio communications 153-4
Orion spy ship 235, 236, 317                   Radio Intelligence Committee 266
Osipovich, Lt. Col. Gennadi 51                 radio networks, HF 101, 105-6
OVIC 281                                       radio traffic
                                                   decryption 160-1, 177-8
348       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

     Indonesian 293—4-                        'Satyr', Operation 105
     monitoring 3, 38-9, 48, 132, 190-1,      Saudi Arabia 155
     253^                                     Sauterne Mark I cipher machine 34
radio transmission, propaganda 190            Scandinavia, Sigint 209-10, 236-8
RAF intelligence 80-3                         Scharping, Rudolf 1
Rainbow Warrior 196                           Schauffler, Rudolf 160
Ramsbotham, Sir Peter 315                     Schlesinger, James R. 146
Reagan, President Ronald 53                   Schlichter, Franz 159
reconnaisance                                 Schmidt, Helmut 135, 144, 146
     aerial and maritime 5                    Schmidt-Eenboom, Erich 129
     satellites 42                            Schnell, Karl 145
REG 179                                       Schröder, Gerhard 167
Reilly, Patrick 75                            SDECE 183-6, 321, 323
Renamo 155                                        Algeria 190-2
Resistance, Danish 217                            control of GCR 193-5
'Rhyolite' satellite 46                           Indochina 186-9
Ridgway, Gen. Matthew B. 35                       reorganisation under Mitterrand 196-7
Rocard, Michel 200                            Second World War, Sigint 1
Romon, Lt. Col. Gabriel 179, 180              Secord, Richard 19
Rondot, Gen. Philippe 201                     security
Room 14, cryptological bureau 288-90              GCHQ 90-2
Roscher Lund, Alfred 212, 213, 215, 219-20,       Sigint operations 12-14
     221, 226                                 Selchow, Kurt 160
Rossby, Âke 223                               Serre, Henri 196
Royal Air Force 81                            Service de Renseignement 178-9
Royal Navy 81, 84                             SHAPE 79-80
     Sigint 75, 89-90                         Shell 272
RUARA-1 34                                    SiNacer 181
Rudner, Martin 97, 319                        Sigint
Rühe, Volker 152                                   1950s 35-41
RUMUA-1 34                                         1960s 41-5
RUNLB-1 34                                         1970s 45-7
RUNLC-1 34                                         1980s 47-53
RUNMD-1 34                                        Algerian War 190-2
Russell, Brian Ashford 72                         based at diplomatic posts 106-7
Russell, Sheridan 72                              Bundeswehr 133-5, 137-8, 139-40,
Russia 211                                         141-3, 143-4
     foreign intelligence service 157-8           Canada 11, 20-1, 76-7, 99-108
Russo-Japanese War 178                            cooperation 75-80, 258-60, 313-14
Rust, Mathias 51-2                                Commonwealth network 108
                                                  cost-effectiveness 10-11
SACEUR 252                                        early Cold War 31-5
SACLANT 252                                       equipment 154-5
Saï'd, Mohammedi 181                              flaps and shoot-downs 83-7
Salan, Gen. Raoul 188                             fragmentary nature 16-17
Salm, Rear Adm. G.B. 291                          France 177-9
SALT 1 47                                         future trends 121^4
'Sambo' direction finding system 45               importance 4-11
SAMs 233                                          Indochina 186-9
Sarigue 198, 201                                  Italy 72-3
satellite interception dishes 110, 270            joint operations, West Germany 144-50
satellites                                        lack of co-ordination 19-20
     interception, Netherlands 269-70             Latin America 260-3
     reconnaisance 42, 44, 204                    local operations 105
     Sigint 17, 46-7, 109-12,201                  long-distance operations 105-6
     West Germany 150-3                           Netherlands 20, 244-51
INDEX                                                                                 349
    over-reliance on 14-16                  Stimson, Arthur 144
    post-Cold War 114-18                    Stoph, Willy 135
    Scandinavia 209-10, 236-8               Stordahl, Nils 221
    Scandinavian/US relations 210-11        STR 182, 187, 188
    secrecy 12-14                           Strategic Air Command, USA 37-8
    snobbery 16                             strategic bomber force, Soviet 37, 43
    speed of 7-9                            Strauss, Franz Josef 135
    US-German cooperation 144-50, 323       Stripp, Alan 74
    US/Danish cooperation 228-9             Studeman, Vice Adm. William O. 28, 275
    US/Sweden cooperation 223-5             Stützle, Walther 153
    vulnerability 18-19                     Subandrio 298
    West Germany 131-2, 135-40              submarines
Signal Security Agency 31-2                      ballistic missile 45, 47
Silberzahn, Claude 200                           French 203
Silver cipher system 43                          reconnaissance 39
Singapore, Netherlands intelligence 300-1        Sigint operations 84-5
SIS 68-9, 70                                     Soviet, tracking 231-2
SLBMs 209, 231,232                          Sudomo, Adm. 305
Smith, Gen. Walter Bedell 20, 35            Suez Canal 78
SOE 180                                     Suharto, Gen. 264
Sokolov, Marshal Sergei L. 52               Sukarno, President 155, 264, 292, 293, 297,
Sokolowski, Claudine 194                         298, 304, 307, 308
Sorge, Richard 178                               political movements against 300-1
SOSUS47, 231-2, 237                         Sumatra 300, 301
Sound Surveillance System 47                Superb, HMS 81
Soustelle, Jacques 182                      Surinam 262-3, 280
South Africa, Sigint equipment 161-2        Sutela, Gen. Lauri 230
South Korea, invasion 39^4-0                Sverdrup, Erling 221
Soviet Union                                S VIC 281
    air activity 80-3                       SVR 157-8
    atomic bomb 73^1                        Sweden 77, 209, 277
    Canadian Sigint operations 99-103,           cooperation with USA 223-5
     105-8                                       codebreaking 214, 216
    cipher systems 18, 33-5, 37, 213-15          Sigint 212-13, 222-5, 234-6, 237, 317,
    closed society 6                             320
     end of 201                                  spy planes 233-4
     infiltration 5                         Swedish Air Force 233-4
     intelligence target 28-31, 314         SYGDASIS 276-7
    proximity to Scandinavia 209-10         Syria 272
     Sigint 10-11, 13,32-5
     support for Indoesia 309-10            tactical air force, Soviet 38
Soviet-Chinese fighting (1969) 43           Taiga computer system 203-4
Spain 152, 161                              Taiwan 156-7, 326-7
     secret service 156                     'Taper' traffic, Soviet 73
Spanjaard, J. 251, 252, 255, 258, 259       Teicher, Howard 122
SPOT satellite imagery 201                  telecommunications, covert interception
spy planes 2 3 3 ^                               116-17
spy rings, Soviet 40                        telex traffic, interception 265
spy ships 236                               Telint, Scandinavia 220-1
     French 198-9                           terrorism
     Swedish 235                                 Canadian security concern 115-16
SR 169, 180                                      international 117
     Denmark 217-19                         Thant, U-308
SS-24 50                                    Thorén, Cdr Torgil 222-3
STASI 19, 195                               Thorneycroft, Peter 88
Steichen, Commander Michel 192              Tibet 5
350       SECRETS OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE DURING THE COLD WAR

TICOMs71-2                                       Venona decrypts 40, 91, 100, 103, 192-3,
Tirante, USS 39                                       215, 225
TIVC 20, 243, 244, 247-51, 280-1, 317            Ventre, Jérôme 200
     cooperation with Britain 275-6              Verkuyl, Col. J.A. 247, 250, 251, 291
     diplomatic traffic 277-8                    Vichy 179-80
     economic intelligence 278-9, 327-8          Viet Minh 186-9, 316, 325
     financial problems 253-6, 2 6 3 ^ , 273-4   Vietnam 5
     Gulf War (1991) 279-80                      Vietnam War 10, 12-13, 41, 43, 45, 195,
     Indonesian traffic 256-8                         235-6
     Latin America 260-3                         Villa, Danish Sigint 218-19, 225, 228-9, 233
     liaison with Americans 251-2, 274-5         VKL230
     Middle East operations 264-5, 271-2         Vlakke Hoek, naval engagement 304
     oil crisis 271-3                            Vo Nguyen Giap, Gen. 186, 188
     targets 266-9                               'Vortex' satellite 51
Tonkin Gulf incidents 7
Tordella, Louis 225-6, 228                       Wagner, G.A. 272
Tovey, Brian 195                                 Wahoo, USS 39
trade unions                                     Waibel,Col. Max 183
     CGT 194                                     Walker, John 91
     GCHQ 89-90                                  Wang Zheng, Gen. 188
transnational crime 116-17, 123                  weapons, mass destruction 117-18
Traube, Klaus 164                                Weinberger, Caspar 19, 235
Travis, Edward 73, 76                            Weisband, William W 18, 35, 91-2
TRIC315                                          Weizäcker, Richard von 167
Truman, President Harry S 36, 76, 79             Welchman, Gordon 69
Tunander, Ola 235                                Wenger, Gen. Günther 143
Tunisia 181, 191                                 Wenger, Vice Adm. Joseph N. 4
Turkey 87, 161, 278, 316, 319, 324, 326, 327     Wennerstrom, Col. Stig 224
secret service 156                               Wessel, Gerhard 135, 138-9, 164
Turner, Vice Adm. Stansfield 5                   West Germany 15
                                                     French zone 185
U-2 spyplane 40, 83-4, 85-6                          Sigint 20
Uganda 155                                       'White Cloud' satellite 46
Uhrlau, Ernst 150, 329                           Wiebes,Cees 1,243,313,317
UKUSA 33-5, 41, 45, 50, 76-7, 91, 109,           Wigg, George 90-1
     118, 192, 195, 204, 229, 261-2, 280         Wilson, Harold 90
    Canadian participation 103                   WKC 243, 244, 291, 303, 307, 310
    collaborative relationships 314-20               New Guinea 295
    future of 122-3                              Wöolsey, James 329
    satellite network 109-12                     Wright, Peter 225, 259
Ulbricht, Walter 135                             Wust, Gen. Harald 140, 151
Ultra 17, 100                                    Wybot, Roger 186
United Kingdom
    and conflict over New Guinea 298,            Yamut, Gen. Nuri 324
    300-1                                        Yardley, Herbert 212
    cryptanalysis 33-5                           Yellow Stroke Reports 160-1
    Sigintll, 13                                 Yom Kippur War (1973) 195
United States                                    Young, Senator Milton 7, 53
    and conflict over New Guinea 198-9           Yugoslavia 272
    economic intelligence 329
US Air Force, intelligence 80-3, 230             'Zebra' computer 255-6
US Army, origins of BND 131-2                    ZfCH 159-60, 162
USAFFS 32                                        Ziare 196
                                                 Zimmermann, Friedrich 140-1
van der Stoel, Max 243, 273
Venezuela 261-2, 310-11
